Journal Pre-proofs
Review Article
Trained immunity modulators: A new frontier in immunoregulation and dis‐
ease intervention
Jiao Chen, Chenxi Wang, Shilin Chen, Hui Cai, Mengke Wang, Jingjie
Chang, Xueting Cai, Jie Yang, Peng Cao
PII:
S2090-1232(25)00734-9
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.09.029
Reference:
JARE 2456
To appear in:
Journal of Advanced Research
Received Date:
2 April 2025
Revised Date:
3 September 2025
Accepted Date:
16 September 2025
Please cite this article as: Chen, J., Wang, C., Chen, S., Cai, H., Wang, M., Chang, J., Cai, X., Yang, J., Cao, P.,
Trained immunity modulators: A new frontier in immunoregulation and disease intervention, Journal of
Advanced Research (2025), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.09.029
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover
page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version
will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are
providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors
may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2025 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.
Trained Immunity Modulators: A New Frontier in Immunoregulation and 
Disease Intervention
Jiao Chena,b*, Chenxi Wangb, Shilin Chenb, Hui Caib, Mengke Wangb, Jingjie Changb, Xueting 
Caia,b, Jie Yanga,b*, Peng Caoa,b,c,d*
a Jiangsu Provincial Integrated Innovation Center of Hospital Preparations, Jiangsu Province Academy of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210028, China;
b Jiangsu Provincial Medicinal Innovation Center, Affiliated Hospital of Integrated Traditional Chinese and 
Western Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210028, China
c State Key Laboratory on Technologies for Chinese Medicine Pharmaceutical Process Control and Intelligent 
Manufacture, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210023, China
d Shandong Academy of Chinese Medicine, Jinan, 250014, China
* Correspondence: 
E-mail addresses: chenjiao@njucm.edu.cn (J. Chen), yangjie0087@126.com (J. Yang), cao_peng@njucm.edu.cn 
(P. Cao).
Trained Immunity Modulators: A New Frontier in Immunoregulation and 
Disease Intervention
Abstract:
Background: Immunotherapy has emerged as one of the most revolutionary approaches in 
disease treatments. However, most current and emerging immunotherapeutic strategies primarily 
target the adaptive immune system. Recent studies have elucidated that innate immune myeloid 
cells can develop sustained phenotypic modifications upon exposure to specific immunomodulators, 
mediated through coordinated metabolic alterations and epigenetic reprogramming. These changes 
lead to either hyperresponsive or hyporesponsive innate immune cells when exposed to secondary 
stimuli, a phenomenon termed “trained immunity”. Over the past decade, trained immunity has 
garnered increasing attention for its potential to enhance host defense. While numerous studies 
have investigated trained immunity modulators, comprehensive reviews—especially those 
focusing on recently identified modulators—are still lacking. 
Aim of review: This review aims to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying trained 
immunity and its dual roles in various pathological conditions. We provide a comprehensive 
summary of the classifications and mechanisms of trained immunity inducers and suppressors 
identified in the past decade, emphasizing their therapeutic potential in immune-related diseases. 
Additionally, we discuss the limitations of these trained immunity modulators and offer insights 
into future directions for developing novel therapies targeting trained immunity.
Key scientific concepts of review: This review first provide an overview of the molecular 
mechanisms underlying trained immunity, highlighting both its beneficial and detrimental effects 
on various diseases. Then it focuses on summarizing the classification and mechanisms of trained 
immunity modulators, including vaccines, polysaccharides, nanobiologics, endogenous mediators 
and other non-canonical modulators. Finally, the limitations of current trained immunity 
modulators and insights into future directions for developing novel therapies targeting trained 
immunity are proposed.
Keywords: Trained immunity, Inducer, Suppressor, Vaccine, Polysaccharide
1. Introduction
Immune memory has garnered increasing worldwide attention due to its crucial role in the 
protective efficacy of vaccines and other immunotherapies. For a long time, it was believed that 
immune memory was a unique feature of adaptive immunity. Consequently, most available 
immunotherapeutic approaches have primarily focused on the adaptive T lymphocytes, with the most 
advanced clinical applications including specific antibodies directed against PD-1, PD-L1, and 
CTLA4, which have brought great benefits to patients [1-3]. However, substantial research in recent 
decade has challenged this classical view of immune responses, revealing that innate immune cells 
can also acquire memory-like characteristics after exposure to stimuli. These responses, 
characterized by either heightened or diminished immune reaction upon secondary exposure to 
identical or unrelated stimuli, are defined as “trained immunity” (also referred to as “innate immune 
memory”) and “tolerance”, respectively (Fig. 1 A) [4]. Both phenomena are primarily driven by 
metabolic and epigenetic reprogramming mechanisms, with divergent outcomes determined by the 
nature of the priming stimulus and the downstream signaling cascades engaged [5-7]. 
A prominent example is the Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine, which is currently 
approved by FDA for immunotherapy of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). Notably, its 
therapeutic effect is largely attributed to the activation of trained immunity [8, 9]. Over the past 
decade, trained immunity has rapidly emerged as a transformative concept in immunology. Given its 
potential, targeting innate immune cells to regulate trained immunity serves as an encouraging 
approach for the prevention and treatment of a variety of immune-associated disorders.
Trained immunity represents a durable, functional adaptation of innate immune cells, 
maintaining regulatory modifications that endure from several months to even years in humans [10, 
11]. This phenomenon has been observed in both central and peripheral innate immune cells (Fig. 1 
B). Early trained immunity research primarily focused on circulating monocytes/macrophages and 
natural killer (NK) cells [12, 13]. Subsequent studies revealed that bone marrow progenitor cells can 
also acquire memory-like phenotypes and transmit these traits to their offspring, which eventually 
migrate to tissues and differentiate into tissue macrophages, neutrophils and NK cells [14-16]. More 
recent findings indicate that trained immunity can also be triggered in other immune cell types such 
as dendritic cells (DCs) and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) [17, 18]. Interestingly, certain nonimmune 
cell types, including epithelial cells, endothelial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, and fibroblasts, 
have also been shown to acquire trained immunity-like characteristics [19-22].
Unlike T and B lymphocytes, which obtain specific adaptive immune memory though antigen 
receptor gene rearrangement and clonal expansion, innate immune cells build immune memory 
mainly via pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). These evolutionarily conserved sensors recognize 
pathogenic invaders (pathogen-associated molecular patterns, PAMPs) and endogenous danger 
signals (damage-associated molecular patterns, DAMPs), initiating innate immune activation 
[23-25]. Major PRRs classes include Toll-like receptors (TLRs), C-type lectin receptors (CLRs), and 
NOD-like receptors (NLRs), each specialized in detecting distinct microbial or endogenous signals 
[26-28]. The nature of the PRR-PAMP/DAMP interactions determines the downstream signaling and 
ultimately the immune responses. 
Trained immunity develops mainly through the intricate interactions between metabolic and 
epigenetic modifications within innate immune cells. Upon initial stimulation, the recognition of 
PAMPs, DAMPs, or other specific ligands by PRRs triggers cascades of intracellular events that 
enhance metabolic pathways, including the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, glycolysis, and 
cholesterol metabolism, primarily through the AKT-mTOR-HIF1α signaling axis [6, 7, 29-31]. 
Metabolites like fumarate and acetyl-CoA, generated through these pathways, regulate epigenetic 
enzymes, including histone demethylases (e.g., KDM5) and histone acetyltransferases, thereby 
modifying chromatin structure [6, 29]. These processes alter histone methylation and acetylation 
patterns at promoters and enhancers of proinflammatory genes, increasing chromatin accessibility 
and facilitating transcriptional activation [32]. As a result, innate immune cells exhibit an enhanced 
ability to produce cytokines and reactive oxygen species (ROS), as well as increased phagocytic and 
antimicrobial activity upon re-stimulation [33, 34].
From an evolutionary standpoint, trained immunity likely evolves as a mechanism to enhance 
host defense against recurrent pathogen challenges or tissue damage [4, 35, 36]. However, 
maladaptive manifestations of trained immunity, either hyperinflammation or immunosuppression, 
can contribute to various disease states. Thus, both the induction and deficiency of trained immunity 
can impact disease pathogenesis and clinical outcomes [37]. In this review, we summarize the 
beneficial and detrimental effects of trained immunity in different diseases. We also provide an 
updated overview of potential trained immunity modulators, their mechanisms, and recent advances 
in trained immunity-based immunotherapy, offering insights for developing novel and more effective 
modulators for the treatment of related diseases.
Fig. 1 Trained immunity and involved cell populations. A. Trained immunity and tolerance. Upon stimulation 
by immunomodulators, the innate immune cells produce an initial response. Upon secondary stimulation, they 
produce either hyperresponsiveness (trained immunity) or hyporesponsiveness (tolerance). B. Cell populations and 
mechanisms involved in trained immunity. PAMP/DAMPs or other specific ligands train the progenitor cells of 
bone marrow to acquire memory-like phenotypes that are transmitted to circulating cells. Circulating cells, which 
can also be trained directly by immunomodulators, eventually migrate to tissues, where they enhance 
proinflammatory responses upon rechallenge. In addition, trained immune reprogramming also occurs in 
non-immune cells, such as epithelial cells, endothelial cells, VSMCs, fibroblasts, etc. Recognition of 
PAMP/DAMPs by PRRs triggers metabolic upregulation (including glycolysis, TCA cycle, cholesterol/fatty acid 
synthesis, and glutaminolysis) and epigenetic reprogramming (such as histone demethylation and acetylation), 
which underlie trained immunity induction. The figure is created with Figdraw.com.
2. The Role of Trained Immunity in Disease
2.1 Protective roles in re-infectious diseases
Infectious diseases represent a major public health threat, particularly in low-income regions. 
Trained immunity, observed in both innate immune cells and certain nonimmune cell types, plays an 
important role in resisting various exogenous and endogenous pathogens, especially in cases where 
adaptive immunity is delayed, inefficient or impaired (Fig. 2). This enhanced immune response 
provides broad and nonspecific protection upon secondary exposure to pathogens, and has been 
proved particularly beneficial in re-infectious diseases. Early studies found that vaccination with 
BCG reduced the overall mortality in newborns and low-birth-weight infants [38, 39]. Interestingly, 
BCG vaccination also provides beneficial effects against infections in adolescents and older 
individuals, highlighting its broad immunostimulatory capacity across different age groups [40-43]. 
Further studies have revealed that vaccinated with BCG induces cross-immunity, offering protection 
not only against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) but also against unrelated pathogens such as 
influenza virus, poliovirus, Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae), and Plasmodium species 
[44-48]. This broad-spectrum, T- and B-cell-independent protection is recently attributed to trained 
immunity. In addition to BCG, other live attenuated vaccines, including the measles-mumps-rubella 
(MMR) vaccine and oral polio vaccine (OPV), have been shown to induce trained immunity in 
innate immune system, resulting in broad-spectrum protective responses against subsequent 
infections, regardless of pathogen specificity [49-51]. This cross-protective effect is particularly 
beneficial in low-resource settings, where it not only reduces the overall cost of vaccination but also 
broadens protection against multiple infectious threats.
Beyond vaccines, other trained immunity inducers such as β-glucan, have demonstrated the 
capacity to enhance protection against a range of heterologous pathogens, including Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa), Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus), Mtb, and Leishmania braziliensis 
(L. braziliensis) [7, 52-54]. However, persistent or uncontrolled infections can lead to sustained 
immune activation, resulting in tissue damage. In such cases, excessive trained immune responses 
may contribute to immunopathology, including sepsis, where overwhelming systemic inflammation 
leads to multiorgan damage. Therefore, the regulation of trained immunity must be finely tuned to 
both enhancing host defense and preventing immune-mediated tissue injury.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the potential of trained immunity-inducing vaccines has 
been investigated through experimental, clinical and epidemiological studies for their role in 
protecting against SARS-CoV-2. Animal studies have demonstrated that BCG vaccination provides 
partial protection against SARS-CoV-2 infection [55, 56]. Vaccines such as BCG and MMR are 
hypothesized to reduce disease severity and mortality associated with COVID-19, although 
conclusive evidence from large-scale randomized clinical trials is still needed [57-63]. Furthermore, 
BCG vaccination-induced trained immunity has been demonstrated to heighten the responsiveness of 
B and T lymphocytes to SARS-CoV-2 vaccines utilizing mRNA and adenoviral vector technologies 
[57, 59]. These findings imply that boosting the innate immune responses may improve vaccine 
efficacy by creating a more robust immunological environment prior to the activation of 
antigen-specific responses. Nevertheless, it should be emphasized that, under specific conditions, 
viral infections themselves can induce overactivation of trained immunity, potentially leading to 
long-term inflammatory sequelae [64-66]. Lessons learned from trained immunity investigations 
during the COVID-19 pandemic may provide valuable insights for the design of preventive strategies 
against future outbreaks of infectious diseases.
2.2 Harmful impact in persistent inflammatory disorders
While trained immunity plays a protective role in combating infections, it also exerts 
detrimental effects in persistent inflammatory disorders, such as autoimmune disorders, 
cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative conditions, allergies, and organ transplantation rejection 
(Fig. 2). Under such conditions, maladaptive trained immunity may sustain sterile inflammation and 
initiate persistent inflammatory cascades, thereby fueling the progression of chronic inflammatory 
disorders. 
In autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the aberrant production of 
proinflammatory cytokines can induce trained immunity, leading to heritable modifications of 
cellular metabolism and gene expression patterns in hematopoietic stem progenitor cells (HSPCs) 
populations. This reprogramming results in exacerbated inflammatory responses that perpetuate joint 
inflammation and induce bone destruction [67-69]. Trained immunity has been observed in both 
mature osteoclasts and their precursors, which produce stronger secondary inflammatory responses 
and elevated bone resorption in chronic arthritic conditions [70]. As an immunological regulator, 
trained immunity alters the host's responsiveness to treatment and affects RA outcomes, typically 
manifesting as persistent inflammatory episodes and relapse following medication withdrawal [68].
The role of trained immunity in atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease has attracted 
growing attention. Emerging evidence suggests that trained immunity contributes to the sustained 
inflammatory response underlying atherosclerotic plaque formation and progression [71-75]. 
Traditional cardiovascular risk factors such as dyslipidaemia, diabetes, hypertension, along with 
lifestyle-related factors like stress, insomnia, lack of exercise and Western-style diet, as well as 
inflammatory states such as infections, gout, and periodontitis, all predispose to induce trained 
immunity and lead to an elevated risk of atherosclerosis [74]. Moreover, acute adverse 
cardiovascular events themselves can also cause persistent immunological alterations in HSPCs, 
contributing to continuous generation of proinflammatory innate immune cells such as monocytes, 
neutrophils, and NK cells [71-73]. Trained immunity can also occur in tissue-resident innate immune 
cells, which may infiltrate atherosclerotic plaques, where they contribute to the inflammatory 
environment and plaque instability.
In the context of neurocognitive disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), maladaptive 
trained immunity also exacerbates disease progression. Experimental murine AD models have 
demonstrated that systemic immune challenges provoke enduring epigenetic reprogramming of 
central nervous system macrophages (namely microglia), subsequently accelerating cerebral 
β-amyloid plaque deposition and cognitive decline [76]. These changes are associated with activation 
of pathways such as HIF1α and mTOR, resulting in transcriptional and functional reprogramming of 
microglia that promote neuroinflammation [77, 78]. Additionally, patients with neurovascular 
disorders and comorbid systemic inflammation demonstrate trained immunity phenotypes in 
circulating monocytes, evidenced by hyperresponsiveness to ex vivo challenge and elevated release 
of IL-6/IL-8. This hyperinflammatory profile correlates with both clinical severity and 
neuropathological progression [79]. These findings indicate that the triggering of trained immunity 
by chronic systemic inflammation contributes to neurodegeneration via sustained neuroinflammatory 
responses.
In organ transplantation, post-transplant immune rejection is a crucial factor undermining 
transplant success, where trained immunity—with its heightened innate immune responses—may 
potentially compromise graft tolerance. In experimental organ transplantation models, donor organ 
ischemia-reperfusion injury triggers peripheral inflammation, promoting long-term trained immunity 
in graft-site macrophages that exacerbates transplant rejection [80]. These trained macrophages 
exhibit increased pro-inflammatory cytokines production and mTOR/HIF1α pathway activation, 
which drive changes in epigenetic modification and cellular function. New findings demonstrate that 
trained immunity impedes kidney transplant success. Uremic toxins such as indoxyl sulfate in 
patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) can induce trained immunity, leading to sustained 
activation of long-lived CD14+CD16++ memory monocytes [81, 82]. These cells promote systemic 
inflammation and may potentially mediate allograft rejection. Another study establishes trained 
immunity suppression as a critical determinant of kidney allograft survival, identifying it as a novel 
therapeutic target to enhance transplant outcomes [83].
2.3 Dual role in cancer progression
Recent research has underscored the great potential of trained immunity in combating cancer. 
Notably, the BCG vaccine has demonstrated anti-tumor effects through the induction of trained 
immunity and is currently utilized in the treatment of NMIBC, as well as in certain cases of 
malignant lymphoma and melanoma [84-86]. In addition, BCG has shown therapeutic potential in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver metastases, through mechanisms that are believed to 
resemble those involved in NMIBC treatment [87]. Moreover, BCG has been associated with a 
reduced risk of several other malignancies, including lung cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, and 
colorectal cancers [88-93], although whether the treatment outcomes are directly attributable to 
trained immunity remains to be fully elucidated.
Another immunostimulatory agent, β-glucan, has also demonstrated the ability to suppress 
melanoma and Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) growth by innate immune training of granulopoiesis 
[33]. Furthermore, whole β-glucan particles have been shown to reprogram lung interstitial 
macrophages to a trained immunity phenotype, thereby inhibiting tumor metastasis [94]. The 
strategic enhancement of trained immunity using rationally designed nanobiologics also holds 
promise in eliciting long-lasting anti-tumor immunity, either as monotherapy or in combination with 
immune checkpoint blockade therapies (e.g., anti-PD-1) to enhance anti-tumor efficacy [95].
Despite these encouraging findings, trained immunity functions as a double-edged sword in the 
context of cancer (Fig. 2). On the one hand, properly harnessed trained immunity can induce robust 
anti-tumor effects; on the other hand, excessive or chronic activation may promote tumor 
progression through sustained inflammation. Innate immune cells infiltrating the tumor 
microenvironment (TME) can undergo metabolic and epigenetic reprogramming, resulting in 
sustained inflammatory responses that may impede cell apoptosis, enhance oxidative stress, promote 
mitochondrial dysfunction, and ultimately accelerate tumor growth [4]. In particular, cytokines such 
as IL-6 and TNF-α secreted from trained innate immune cells have been shown to enhance 
tumorigenesis and metastasis in multiple malignancies [96]. Therefore, a comprehensive 
understanding of the multifaceted roles of trained immunity in oncogenesis is essential for guiding 
its therapeutic application. 
Fig. 2 The dual role and therapeutic prospects of trained immunity. Trained immunity benefits the treatment of 
diseases like infection, but also exacerbates the progression of chronic inflammatory diseases like atherosclerosis. 
Therefore, either inducing or suppressing trained immunity have therapeutic potential. For cancer, properly 
harnessed trained immunity can induce robust anti-tumor effects, but excessive or chronic stimulation-induced 
inflammatory states fuel tumor progression. The figure is created with Figdraw.com.
3. Potential Modulators of Trained Immunity: Inducers and Suppressors
The factors that regulate trained immunity include immunological modulators (both inducers 
and suppressors), the gut microbiota and other microbial environments, the inflammatory status, 
genetic background of the host, and the environmental conditions such as nutrition, lifestyle, and 
pollutants. This section focuses specifically on the potential inducers and suppressors of trained 
immunity (Fig. 3), summarizing their types, therapeutic effects, and underlying mechanisms. 
 
Fig. 3 A schematic diagram summarizing the categories and examples of trained immunity modulators.
3.1 Inducers of trained immunity
The currently identified trained immunity inducers mainly include vaccines, polysaccharides, 
endogenous metabolites, and certain pathogenic microorganisms. These agents activate trained 
immunity, producing enhanced and prolonged immune responses upon secondary exposure to either 
homologous or heterologous stimuli.
3.1.1 Vaccines
Unlike traditional vaccines which are designed to stimulate antigen-specific adaptive immune 
responses, vaccines associated with trained immunity enhance innate immune responses. These 
vaccines provide “heterologous protection”, extending defense against a wide range of pathogens, 
irrespective of related or unrelated. Live attenuated viral vaccines such as BCG, MMR, and the 
polybacterial mucosal vaccine MV130, have demonstrated the ability to induce trained immunity and 
confer broad protective effects [39, 48, 97-102]. Additionally, emerging evidence suggests that 
mRNA vaccines developed against COVID-19 also activate pathways associated with trained 
immunity [102].
(1) BCG vaccine
Most of our knowledge about trained immunity in human stems from studies on the BCG 
vaccine, a live attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis developed for tuberculosis prevention [103, 
104]. The protective role of BCG against Mtb-unrelated infections and cancers through trained 
immunity has been discussed in Section 2.1. BCG exerts its effects through the activation of PRRs 
such as TLR2/4 and NOD2, triggering epigenetic and metabolic reprogramming in monocytes and 
HSPCs. Key molecular features include histone H3K4 trimethylation and enhanced glycolytic 
activity, contributing to sustained inflammatory cytokine responses [43, 105] (Table 1). 
Beyond infectious diseases, BCG exhibits beneficial effects against cancer, partly medicated by 
trained immunity [106, 107]. Clinical studies report sustained elevation of TNF-α and IL-1β 
secretion in peripheral monocytes from treated NMIBC patients [106]. Autophagy and interferon 
(IFNs) signaling are crucial for BCG-induced epigenetic modifications, and their inhibition blocks 
H3K4 trimethylation in monocytes [9, 108].
Single-cell RNA sequencing of immune cells from 156 samples revealed heterogenic 
transcriptional responses to lipopolysaccharides (LPS) in both monocytes and CD8+ T cells. IFN-γ 
signaling is critical and upregulated in high BCG responders, with STAT1 identified as a key 
transcription factor involved in trained immunity in monocytes [108]. 
To enhance BCG-mediated immune responses, recombinant BCG overexpressing cyclic di-AMP 
has been developed. This modification improves the efficacy of anti-bladder cancer and exhibits 
greater potential than wild-type BCG by inducing higher IFN-β production, promoting M1-like 
macrophage polarization, activating epigenetic markers in proinflammatory cytokine promoters 
while shifting monocyte metabolism toward glycolysis [109, 110]. 
Combining BCG with cancer immunotherapies has shown promising results [111-113]. A 
clinical trial found that intravesical BCG combined with MAGE-A3 vaccine therapy enhanced local 
T-cell responses in patients with NMIBC compared to using the MAGE-A3 cancer vaccine alone 
[113]. Daman et al. proved that intravesical BCG reprogramed HSPCs via IFN-γ, enhancing myeloid 
cell antigen presentation and promoting T cell infiltration, which synergized with PD-1 blockade 
[112]. A case report also described disease stabilization in a gastric neuroendocrine carcinoma 
patient treated with BCG plus nivolumab [111]. However, further large-scale studies are needed to 
fully evaluate the potential benefits of trained immunity inducers, such as BCG, as adjuvants to 
immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy.
(2) MMR vaccine
The MMR vaccine provides effective prophylaxis against measles, mumps, and rubella. 
Epidemiological studies suggest that it also reduces all-cause childhood mortality via heterologous 
effects [114, 115]. A case-control study observed a reduction in COVID-19 incidence among men 
who received the MMR vaccine [116]. Most research on trained immunity-induced heterologous 
protection from vaccines such as BCG and influenza has focused on the training of myeloid cells 
[10, 117, 118]. However, single-cell multiomics analysis (including transcriptional and epigenetic 
profiling) from a clinical trial revealed that MMR primarily induced trained immunity in γδT cells 
rather than monocytes [50]. These γδT cells produce higher levels of TNF and IFN-γ, and upregulate 
cellular metabolic pathways following MMR stimulation. The differences in trained immunity 
programs induced by BCG (myeloid cells-dependent) and MMR (lymphoid cells-dependent) suggest 
that different vaccines can induce distinct types of trained immunity.
(3) MV130 vaccine
MV130 is a whole heat-inactivated polybacterial mucosal vaccine comprising of varying ratios 
of Gram-positive and Gram-negative microorganisms. Clinical trials report that MV130 significantly 
reduces the incidence of recurrent respiratory infections [119, 120]. In murine models, MV130 
preconditioning confers cross-protection against viral respiratory infections [49]. It also protects 
against systemic candidiasis in a manner independent of B and T lymphocytes, and inhibition of 
trained immunity through the mTOR pathway abrogates its heterologous protection effect. MV130 
induced epigenetic reprogramming of mouse myeloid progenitors, and drives both epigenetic and 
metabolic alterations in human monocytes, resulting in increased cytokine production [49]. These 
findings collectively indicate that MV130 is an inducer of trained immunity.
3.1.2 Polysaccharides
   Extensive evidence highlights the therapeutic efficacy of naturally derived polysaccharides 
across diverse disease states, demonstrating both prophylactic and interventional benefits. Among 
them, certain polysaccharides such as β-glucan—an established inducer of trained immunity—have 
become an extraordinarily popular research topic in the fields of infectious disease and tumor 
immunology. 
(1) β-Glucan
The immunostimulating β-glucan is a natural polysaccharide with (1,3)-linked D-glucose 
backbone and variable lengths of (1-6) glucosidic side chains. It is abundantly found in the cell walls 
of plants, fungi and certain bacteria [121]. Recent studies have shown that two forms of β-glucan, 
soluble fiber β-glucan and whole β-glucan particles (WGP), can induce trained immunity by 
interacting with Dectin-1 and activating the downstream pathway of Akt/mTOR/HIF1α. The 
combination of β-glucan with immunotherapy has sparked renewed interest in trained immunity and 
anti-tumor responses [122]. 
In the context of cancer, aberrant myelopoiesis often leads to an increased production of 
myeloid-derived immune cells, such as monocytes, macrophages and neutrophils. These immune 
subsets typically infiltrate the TME, where they undergo functional reprogramming to acquire 
distinct pro-tumorigenic characteristics. Kalafati et al. demonstrated that prophylactic administration 
of mice with β-glucan significantly inhibited the growth of melanoma and LLC [33]. The 
tumor-suppressive properties were mediated by trained immunity mechanisms involving 
transcriptional and epigenetic remodeling during granulocyte differentiation, as well as the 
functional polarization of neutrophils from a tumor-promoting phenotype (TAN2) to a 
tumor-suppressive phenotype (TAN1). These changes were mediated by type I interferon pathway, 
independent of the host's adaptive immunity. 
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by insufficient infiltration of 
activated immune cells in the TME, resulting in limited responsiveness to immunotherapies such as 
CTLA-4 
and 
PD-1 
inhibitors 
[123]. 
To 
overcome 
the 
immunologically 
suppressive 
microenvironment, particulate WGP β-glucan has been administered intraperitoneally (IP) in murine 
PDAC models. It selectively accumulates in pancreatic tissue, where it induces infiltration of innate 
immune cells such as proinflammatory macrophage/monocytes displaying a trained immunity 
signature in a CCR2-dependent manner [124]. These WGP-educated myeloid cells demonstrate 
augmented tumoricidal capacity through phagocytic potentiation and ROS-dependent cytotoxicity. In 
orthotopic PDAC models, WGP-mediated innate immune reprogramming achieves significant tumor 
regression and survival extension, particularly when combined with PD-L1 checkpoint blockade 
[124]. Additionally, orally administered β-glucan has been confirmed as an alternative route to elicit 
trained immunity, working synergistically with surgical ablation to reduce both local and distant 
PDAC burden [125]. A novel strategy using antibody–β-glucan conjugates (AGC) has been 
proposed to promote β-glucan delivery into the TME while facilitating interactions between tumor 
cells and DCs [126]. Compared to monotherapy, AGC induces faster immune responses, increases 
DC infiltration and T cell activation in the TME, and ultimately leading to enhanced tumor 
suppression in MC38 murine models. 
Tumor metastasis remains the primary cause of cancer-associated deaths, and bone 
marrow-derived hematopoietic progenitors provide a supportive microenvironment in the 
pre-metastatic niche [127]. Ding et al. discovered that WGP treatment triggers the development of 
trained immunity characteristics in pulmonary interstitial macrophages, characterized by elevated 
TNF expression and enhanced phagocytosis upon secondary stimulation [94]. This reprogramming, 
driven by sphingolipid synthesis and mitochondrial fission, led to reduced metastatic burden and 
prolonged survival in multiple metastasis models.
In addition to anti-cancer effects, β-glucan also exhibits promising potential in combating 
infectious diseases. Moorlag et al. demonstrated that β-glucan triggers protective trained immunity 
via histone modifications as evidenced in both human monocytes and murine models of Mtb 
infection [53]. This protective effect is associated with the expansion of HSPCs and increased 
myelopoiesis via IL-1 signaling. IL-32 has also been identified to be crucial for β-glucan-induced 
protection against L. braziliensis infection [52]. β-Glucan protects against S. aureus sepsis and 
Candida albicans (C. albicans) infection via trained immunity mechanisms dependent on 
mTOR/HIF1α-mediated aerobic glycolysis [7]. Stothers et al. found that β-glucan confers protection 
against P. aeruginosa infection in murine models through inducing trained immunity in 
macrophages, which are characterized by augmented phagocytosis, increased ROS production, and 
sustained enhanced glycolytic and oxidative metabolism [54]. Superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO), 
a clinical used iron supplement approved by FDA has been shown to relieve LPS-stimulated sepsis 
in murine models by promoting IL-10 secretion from macrophages. Pan et al. developed 
β-glucan-coupled SPIO nanoparticles (BSNPs), which effectively reprogram macrophages through 
mTOR signaling to boost trained immunity and enhance bacteria phagocytosis, thereby protecting 
mice from sepsis and secondary infections [128].
β-Glucan incorporating tumor antigens have been developed as anti-tumor vaccines, aiming to 
strategically combine trained innate immunity with adaptive immunity for enhanced cancer 
immunotherapy. In addition to acting as a trained immunity inducer that triggers proinflammatory 
cytokine production, β-glucan also enhances antigen uptake and presentation by DCs, promotes DC 
maturation and boosts T cell-mediated immune responses [129]. A recent study developed a 
personalized cancer vaccine by engineering the model immunogen ovalbumin, β-glucan and the 
non-viable probiotic Escherichia coli (E. coli) Nissle 1917 (EcN) [130]. Following subcutaneous 
injection, the engineered vaccine is phagocytosed by macrophages, resulting in the induction of 
trained immunity evidenced by enhanced TNF-α production and phagocytosis upon secondary 
stimulation. These trained macrophages promote DC recruitment and maturation, ultimately 
enhancing T cell-mediated anti-tumor responses. In vivo experiments confirmed that the engineered 
vaccine efficiently inhibited tumor growth and prevented postoperative tumor recurrence by eliciting 
stronger adaptive and trained innate anti-tumor immune responses [130]. 
Another study developed a nano-cancer vaccine incorporating the human papillomavirus (HPV) 
E7 tumor antigen with two types of trained immunity inducers, β-glucan and muramyl dipeptide 
(MDP), which almost completely suppressed the growth of TC-1 tumors [131]. The nanovaccine 
effectively delivers the tumor antigens and trained immunity inducers to the lymph nodes and DCs, 
promoting DC maturation and augmenting the responses of E7 antigen-specific CD8+ T cells 
expressing IFN-γ [131]. These findings indicate that cancer vaccines adjuvanted with trained 
immunity inducers hold great promise for improving adaptive immunotherapy, although their 
efficacy, safety and tolerability in human subjects still require carefully evaluation.
(2) Low dose of LPS
LPS is a structural element of the membranes of Gram-negative bacteria, which functions as a 
PAMP that binds to TLR4, thereby eliciting trained immunity under specific conditions [132]. 
Exposure to low concentrations of LPS activates innate immune cells through MAPK/p38 signaling 
pathway (Figure 3), resulting in elevated secretion of IL-6 and TNF-α upon secondary stimulation 
[133]. This response is associated with epigenetic changes in myeloid cells, which is durable since 
LPS stimulation induces persistent H3K4 methylation in corresponding to enhanced responses upon 
restimulation [134]. LPS-induced trained immunity also depends on the regulation of transcription 
factors, including ATF7 and C/EBPβ [135, 136]. In macrophages, LPS treatment induces 
phosphorylation of ATF7 via p38 kinase, resulting in ATF7 release from chromatin and the 
subsequent reduction of inhibitory H3K9me2 histone marks [135]. While in HSCs, epigenetic 
changes induced by LPS are dependent on C/EBPβ, which facilitates long-term transcriptional 
changes in gene expression via chromatin remodeling [136]. Moreover, metabolic rewiring 
accompanies these epigenetic modifications. LPS-activated macrophages exhibit upregulation of 
glycolysis and downregulation of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), leading to a significant 
accumulation of succinate, a metabolite known to promote inflammatory responses [137]. These 
investigations indicate that LPS can trigger trained immunity through both epigenetic and metabolic 
pathways. In a related study, Zahalka et al. discovered that intranasal exposure to LPS triggers 
prominent memory responses in alveolar macrophages (AM) upon pneumococcal challenge. This 
effect is mediated by the type І interferon signaling pathway, fatty acid oxidation (FAO) and 
glutaminolysis [138]. 
However, LPS can also induce immune tolerance under different conditions. High concentration 
of LPS exposure leads to a tolerogenic state characterized by decreased expression of TLR4 and 
reduced interactions with MyD88, resulting in diminished production of inflammatory cytokines and 
immunosuppression [133]. Epigenetic modifications are also responsible for LPS-induced immune 
tolerance, as evidenced by the failure to accumulate activating histone marks at the promoters and 
enhancers of genes crucial for lipid metabolism and phagocytosis in LPS-treated monocytes [139, 
140]. Notably, Novakovic et al. found that the epigenetic condition of immune tolerance induced by 
LPS can be reversed by β-glucan treatment [139].
(3) Chitin
Chitin is a natural polysaccharide mainly composed of N-acetylglucosamine units connected by 
β-1,4-glucosidic bonds [141]. It serves as an important structural component in various organisms, 
especially in the cell walls of bacteria and fungi, as well as in the exoskeletons of invertebrates such 
as insects and crustaceans [142]. In mammals, chitin is recognized by the innate immune system, 
primarily in gut and lung, where it triggers a range of innate immune cells, including monocytes, 
macrophages and eosinophils, and regulates adaptive immune responses (e.g., Th1, Th2 and Th17 
responses). Although the PRRs of FIBCD1, RegIIIc, and NKR-P1 have been reported as 
chitin-binding receptors, the primary immune recognition of chitin in mammals is mediated through 
TLR-2/4 and Dectin-1 [143, 144]. Interactions with these receptors activate immune cells, leading to 
cytokine production and the establishment of an immune network that drives inflammatory 
responses. The full-length chitin polymer is inert; however, catalysis by acidic mammalian chitinase 
(AMCase) produces bioactive fragment that are recognized by TLR-2 and Dectin-1 on the membrane 
of immune cells such as macrophages [145]. Rizzetto et al. found that fungal chitin triggers trained 
immunity in monocytes, as evidenced by amplified secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 upon restimulation 
with TLR ligands in a Saccharomyces Cerevisiae infection model [146]. These chitin-trained 
monocytes also exhibit enhanced intracellular killing ability against fungi and bacteria, with histone 
methylation playing a key role in this process. Despite promising immunostimulatory properties, the 
mechanisms underlying chitin-induced trained immunity remain less well understood than those 
triggered by BCG or β-glucan. In addition to the beneficial effects, chitin-induced trained immunity 
may also have unexpected detrimental effects, as fungi chitin has been shown to exacerbate the 
severity of intestinal inflammation in colitis models [147].
3.1.3 Nanobiologic-based inducers
In this review, nanobiologics are defined as nanoscale platforms that integrate biological or 
synthetic carriers (e.g., vesicles, lipoproteins) with trained immunity inducers. Their immunological 
effects rely not only on the cargo but also on the nanostructure itself, which determines 
biodistribution, cell targeting, and functional synergy. Over the past decade, researchers have 
identified highly effective nanoparticles, such as bacterial outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) and 
MTP10-HDL, which target innate immune cells. These nanoparticles can be engineered into 
nanobiologics by loading them with therapeutic agents. 
(1) OMVs
OMVs are nanoscale vesicles naturally secreted by bacteria and contain abundant PAMPs such 
as peptidoglycan, LPS, and flagellin [148]. These PAMPs endow OMVs with the capacity to 
function as trained immunity inducers. Pre-inoculation of OMVs to mice activated the 
inflammasome signaling pathways and stimulated the production of IL-1β. Elevated IL-1β in bone 
marrow microenvironment causes epigenetic remodeling of hematopoietic progenitor cells, thereby 
enhancing the production of antigen-presenting cell progenitors for subsequent tumor vaccinations. 
This process leads to augmented immune responses and enhances the activation of tumor 
antigen-specific T cells [148]. However, OMVs encounter challenges such as immune tolerance, 
long-term trained effects, systemic delivery issues, and non-specific tumor-targeting phagocytic 
activity mediated by macrophages. 
To overcome these limitations, OMVs have been engineered into a nanohybrid vaccine by 
conjugating them with fusion proteins comprising signal regulatory protein-α(SIRPα)-Fc and 
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) [149]. The OMV-based nanohybrids 
exhibit enhanced anti-tumor activity in the MC38 tumor model (characterized by tumor-associated 
macrophage (TAM)-hot and T cell-cold features) through the activation of trained immunity and 
adaptive T cell-mediated antitumor immunity. In contrast, in the B16-F10 murine melanoma model 
(characterized by TAM-cold and T cell-hot features), their anti-tumor effects are primarily mediated 
through trained immunity. TAM-mediated phagocytosis serves as a crucial immunological bridge 
between innate and adaptive immunity [149]. These findings offer insights into the design of 
immunotherapies that synergize innate training with adaptive response induction.
Traditional OMVs naturally contain endotoxins such as LPS, which can stimulate both immune 
responses and reactogenicity. Detoxification strategies have been explored and Gong et al. 
developed BCG–derived OMVs (B-OMVs) [150]. Unlike traditional OMVs, B-OMVs originate 
from a Gram-positive bacterium, lack LPS, and are non-replicative, thus reducing the risks of 
LPS-induced tolerance and infection. Their nanoscale properties promote tissue distribution and 
penetration. B-OMVs demonstrate stronger trained immunity than BCG, driving immune 
reprogramming and providing robust protection against sepsis in a TLR2-dependent manner. These 
features highlight B-OMVs as promising candidates for sepsis vaccination and anti-infective therapy.
(2) MTP10-HDL
Apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), a primary structural protein constituting natural high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL), interacts with adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding box transporters A1/G1 in 
myeloid cells and has been demonstrated as a carrier to form nanobiologics targeting trained 
immunity. Priem et al. developed MTP10-HDL nanobiologics by encapsulating MTP (a TLR agonist) 
within apoA-I-derived HDL-like particles. These nanobiologics showed promising anti-tumor effects 
in a mouse melanoma model [95]. MTP10-HDL exhibits high avidity for bone marrow and can 
induce myelopoiesis via trained immunity, driven by epigenetic reprogramming of multipotent 
progenitors. This process helps overcome the immunosuppressive TME, thereby enhancing immune 
surveillance and effector function. Furthermore, MTP10-HDL-promoted trained immunity enhances 
the therapeutic effectiveness of immune checkpoint blockade therapies targeting PD-1 and CTLA-4, 
suggesting a potential synergistic strategy for cancer immunotherapy. ApoA-I also holds potential 
for loading with trained immunity inhibitors, such as mTOR inhibitor rapamycin and S6 kinase-1 
(S6K1), which may augment the innate immunosuppressive effects.
Table 1 Vaccines, polysaccharides, and nanobiologic-based inducers of trained immunity.
Types
Inducers
Reported trained cell 
types
Pathways 
involved
Disease 
model
Clinical 
status
Referenc
e
NMIBC
FDA 
approved
BCG
Monocytes, 
macrophages, HSCs
Recognized by 
TLR2/4 and 
NOD2, induce 
autophagy and 
up-regulate IFN-γ 
pathway
COVID-19
Phase 4 
(Complete
d)
[40-41, 
57- 58, 
106-108]
MMR
γδT cells
Boost TNF and 
IFN-γ production 
and metabolic 
pathways
COVID-19
Phase 3 
(Complete
d)
[50, 
114-116]
Vaccines
MV130
Myeloid cells
Activate mTOR 
pathway
Evaluate the 
ability of 
inducing 
trained 
immunity
Phase 1/2 
(Recruiting
)
[49, 119, 
120]
Melanoma
Pre-clinic
Combination 
therapy for 
lung 
carcinoma 
and 
neuroblastom
a
Phase 1 
(Complete
d)
Polysaccharid
es
β-Glucan
Macrophages,monocyt
es, granulocytes,DCs
Interact with 
Dectin-1 and 
activate 
AKT/mTOR/HIF
1α pathway, 
enhance 
glycolytic and 
oxidative 
metabolism
Infectious 
diseases
Pre-clinic
[7, 33, 
52-54, 
94, 
121-126]
3.1.4
Endogenous inducers
(1) Cytokines
Trained immunity is characterized by enhanced proinflammatory responses when the host 
encounters secondary stimuli, making proinflammatory cytokines a crucial component in this 
process. The IL-1 cytokine family has been established as a critical mediator of trained immunity, 
especially in the context of β-glucan stimulation and BCG vaccination. Inhibition of IL-1 counteracts 
the enhanced glycolysis and myelopoiesis induced by β-glucan. Furthermore, the protection efficacy 
of β-glucan against Mtb infection is abolished in IL-1 receptor-deficient murine models [15, 53]. 
Arts et al. observed a strong correlation between elevated production of IL-1β and reduced viremia 
in individuals immunized with BCG followed by yellow fever vaccination as a secondary 
LPS
Macrophages,monocyt
es, AMs, HSCs
Activate 
TLR4/MAPK 
signaling 
pathway, induce 
phosphorylation 
of ATF7 via p38 
kinase, increase 
glycolysis and 
reduce OXPHOS
Abdominal 
tumors, 
combination 
therapy for 
melanoma
Phase 1 
(Complete
d)
[132-138
]
Chitin
Monocytes, 
macrophages, 
eosinophils
Enhance 
production of 
TNF-α and IL-6 
through TLR-2 
and Dectin-1
Leishmania 
infection
/
[143-147
]
OMVs
Hematopoietic 
progenitor cells, 
macrophages
Activate the 
inflammasome 
and TLR-2 
signaling 
pathways 
MC38 and 
B16-F10 
tumor 
models, 
polymicrobia
l Sepsis
/
[148-150
]
Nanobiologics
MTP10-HD
L
Multipotent 
progenitors, myeloid 
cells
Interact with 
ATP-binding box 
transporters 
A1/G1
Melanoma
/
[95]
immunological challenge, indicating a functional role for IL-1β in enhancing antiviral defense [151]. 
Genetic variations in the IL1B locus, particularly single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), have 
been shown to influence the magnitude of BCG-induced trained immune responses. Another study 
from Simats et al. demonstrated that IL-1β drives post-stroke trained immunity via epigenetic 
reprogramming of myeloid cells, and therapeutic inhibition of either IL-1 signaling or monocyte 
recruitment preserves cardiac function after ischemic injury [72]. Importantly, IL-1β is validated to 
induce trained immunity in both human hematopoietic progenitor cells and monocytes in vitro 
through immunological and epigenetic mechanisms [151, 152]. The mechanism underlying 
IL-1β-induced trained immunity may depend on HIF1α, a transcription factor activated via the 
AKT/mTOR signaling pathway, which plays a pivotal role in trained immunity establishment [7, 
137]. 
In addition to the IL-1 family, IFNs, particularly IFN-γ, have emerged as critical regulators of 
trained immunity [9, 16, 33, 108, 153, 154]. BCG-trained HSCs give rise to epigenetically altered 
monocytes/macrophages that exhibit heightened protection against Mtb infection. These protective 
effects are contingent upon type II IFN (IFN-γ) signaling [16]. Conversely, Mtb can subvert trained 
immunity by reprogramming HSCs through type I IFN (IFN-α and IFN-β)/iron axis, which inhibits 
myeloid cell differentiation and impairs the protective trained immunity [153]. Further insights from 
Tran et al. indicates that BCG-induced CD4+CX3CR1hi T cells are essential for cross-protection and 
serve as potent producers of IFN-γ [154]. Remarkably, IFN-γ alone is sufficient to educate AMs to 
generate long-term memory, thereby enhancing protection against inﬂuenza A viruses (IAV) 
infection in mice. 
Interestingly, IL-4, a well-known anti-inflammatory cytokine, has been shown to exhibit dual 
roles. Schrijver et al. revealed that while IL-4 suppresses acute inflammation via STAT6-dependent 
signaling, it simultaneously induces trained immunity in monocytes through activation of the PI3K–
mTOR pathway and enhanced OXPHOS, indicating a previously underappreciated proinflammatory 
function [155, 156]. Given the unfavorable pharmacokinetic characteristics of recombinant IL-4, an 
engineered fusion protein comprising apoA-I and IL-4 embedded in nanoparticles has been 
developed. This IL-4 nanotherapy counteracts immune tolerance in mice with LPS-induced 
hyperinfammation, as well as in ex vivo models of human sepsis and endotoxemia [156]. Therapeutic 
agents with dual effects—simultaneously reducing inflammation and overcoming immune 
tolerance—may facilitate patient recovery and help prevent secondary infections.
Other cytokines, including IL-12/15/18, IL-32, IL-36γ, and GM-CSF [157-166], have also been 
highlighted as essential in triggering and maintaining trained immunity (Table 2). Their roles in 
orchestrating immunological memory within the innate compartment highlight the complex 
regulatory network underpinning this phenomenon.
Table 2 Cytokines involved in trained immunity
Effect on
Cytokine
Secreted by
Characteristic
Trained 
Pathways
Referenc
trained 
immunity
cell types
e
IL-1β
Monocytes, 
macrophages, DCs
proinflammator
y
Monocytes, 
myeloid 
cells, 
macrophag
e
AKT/mTOR/HIF
1α pathway
[7, 8, 15, 
53, 137, 
151]
IFN-γ
CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T 
cells, NK cells, 
CD4+CX3CR1hi T 
cells
proinflammator
y
HSCs, 
monocytes, 
macrophag
es
/
[9, 33, 
108, 153, 
154]
IL-4
Th2 cells, monocytes, 
mast cells
anti-inflammato
ry
Monocytes, 
macrophag
es
PI3K-mTOR, 
OXPHOS
[155, 
156]
IL-12/15/18
Macrophages, DCs, 
NK cells
proinflammator
y
NK cells
Akt/mTOR/HIF1
α pathway
[157, 
158]
IL-32
Monocytes, epithelial 
and endothelial cells
proinflammator
y
HSCs
/
[159]
IL-36γ
Monocytes, T cells
proinflammator
y
monocytes
NF-κB and 
mTOR signaling
[160]
Inducers
GM-CSF/IL-
3
T cells, 
monocytes/macrophag
es
/
HSPC, 
monocytes
p38 and SIRT2
[161, 
162]
IL-10
Regulatory T cells, B 
cells, etc.
anti-inflammato
ry
Monocytes, 
myeloid 
cells, 
HAECs
Inhibit STAT3 
pathway and ROS 
production
[163, 
164]
Suppresso
rs
IL-35
Regulatory T cells, B 
cells, etc.
anti-inflammato
ry
HAECs
Inhibit ROS 
production
[163]
IL-37
Monocytes, 
macrophages, DCs
anti-inflammato
ry
Monocytes, 
BMDMs
Inhibit mTOR 
signaling and 
IL-1β processing
[165]
IL-38
Monocytes, 
macrophages, DCs
anti-inflammato
ry
Monocytes, 
BMDMs
Inhibit 
AKT/mTOR/S6K 
signaling
[158, 
166]
(2) Itaconate and its derivatives
Itaconate is an immunoregulatory metabolite synthesized by immune cells that elicits 
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant reactions. It plays a pivotal function in processes including 
immune regulation, host defense, and tumorigenesis. Under proinflammatory conditions, the enzyme 
immune-responsive gene 1 (IRG1) is upregulated, catalyzing the decarboxylation of cis-aconitate (a 
TCA cycle intermediate) to itaconate [167]. A study by Domı´nguez-Andre´s et al. showed that 
acute activation of myeloid cells by LPS stimulation resulted in a marked increase in IRG1 
expression, leading to extensive accumulation of itaconate. This accumulation blocks succinate 
dehydrogenase (SDH) activity and contributes to eliciting innate immune tolerance in monocytes 
[168]. Notably, β-glucan has been shown to suppress IRG1 expression and restore SDH activity in a 
human endotoxemia model, thereby counteracting LPS-induced tolerance by preserving the integrity 
of the TCA cycle. This indicates that the itaconate biosynthetic pathway serves as a crucial metabolic 
checkpoint in the balance between immune tolerance and trained immunity [168].
In contrast, the study by Ferreira et al. reveals that itaconate and its derivative dimethyl itaconate 
(DMI) initially exhibit short-term immunosuppressive effects but ultimately induce long-term trained 
immunity [169]. After five days of exposure to itaconate or DMI, LPS-stimulated human monocytes 
showed increased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines. DMI also induces epigenomic and 
metabolic alterations, regulates IFN responses and enhances ROS production, similar to the effect of 
β-glucan. The induced trained immunity was found to be dependent on glutathione synthesis. 
Moreover, in vivo investigations demonstrated that DMI treatment protected mice from S. aureus 
infection even in the absence of additional stimuli [169]. Taken together, these findings suggest that 
while itaconate and its derivatives may exert immunosuppression properties under acute 
proinflammatory conditions, they can also induce trained immunity in the absence of further 
stimulation. Nevertheless, the precise immunomodulatory mechanisms remain incompletely 
understood. Given the potential to trigger complex immune responses, caution is warranted when 
considering therapeutic applications of itaconate and its derivatives. 
(3) Fumarate
   Fumarate is a critical metabolic intermediate in TCA cycle generated through the catalysis of 
succinate by SDH in mitochondria. Arts et al. found the accumulation of fumarate in 
β-glucan-trained monocytes, which establish a link between immunometabolic reprogramming and 
long-term epigenetic modifications, notably by suppression of histone demethylase KDM5 [6]. 
Fumarate also prevents the degradation of HIF1α by inhibiting its hydroxylation, which can enhance 
the responses induced by β-glucan [6, 7, 137]. Importantly, fumarate itself has been shown to trigger 
trained immunity by enhancing trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me3) and acetylation 
at lysine 27 (H3K27ac), recapitulating key aspects of β-glucan-mediated epigenetic reprogramming 
[6]. Another study also confirmed that extracellular fumarate treatment increased secretion of TNF-α 
upon LPS stimulation in monocytes [170]. Furthermore, fumarate induces mitochondrial fusion both 
in vitro and in vivo, which is critical to the initiation of trained immunity in monocytes. Fumarate 
supplementation has been demonstrated to enhance mitochondrial fusion in both intestinal cells and 
muscle tissue, and enhance resistance to pharyngeal infection by E. coli in C. elegans. Collectively, 
these findings underscore a significant association between mitochondrial dynamics and 
fumarate-induced trained immunity.
(4) Mevalonate and 24(S),25-epoxycholesterol
Recent studies indicate that activation of the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway, particularly the 
production of mevalonate, serves as a critical regulator in the process of trained immunity in myeloid 
cells. This effect is mediated via the stimulation of the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1-R) 
and mTOR signaling, which in turn induces histone alterations such as H3K27ac enrichment in 
inflammatory pathways [30]. Notably, mevalonate accumulation resulting from mevalonate kinase 
deficiency 
leads 
to 
a 
persistently 
trained 
immunological 
state 
in 
monocytes 
from 
hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome (HIDS) patients, observed at both immunological and epigenetic 
levels. This phenomenon may explain the recurrent inflammatory episodes observed in HIDS 
patients. 
Conversely, 
statins, 
pharmacological 
inhibitors 
of 
hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA 
(HMG-CoA) reductase that reduce mevalonate biosynthesis, can disrupt immune system homeostasis 
[171]. Notably, blockade of mevalonate biosynthesis has been associated with proinflammatory 
consequences, highlighting its dual immunomodulatory role.
Furthermore, the shunt pathway of cholesterol synthesis catalyzed by squalene epoxidase 
(SQLE) 
produces 
24(S),25-epoxycholesterol 
(24(S),25-EC), 
a 
metabolite 
essential 
for 
β-glucan-triggered trained immune responses in macrophages. 24(S),25-EC stimulates liver X 
receptor (LXR) and increases chromatin openness, thereby inducing epigenetic reprogramming 
associated with trained immune memory. Simultaneously, 24(S),25-EC production promotes ROS 
accumulation and stabilizes HIF1α, facilitating metabolism conversion towards glycolysis. 
Pretreatment of macrophages with 24(S),25-EC significantly augments the production of TNF-α, 
IFN-β, and IFN-γ upon secondary stimulation [172]. Moreover, 24(S),25-EC-induced trained 
immunity has been shown to promote anti-tumor activity in vivo, offering promise for future 
immunotherapeutic applications.
(5) Glucose
   Hyperglycemia is a potential driver of atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases. Even with 
rigorous glycaemic control, hyperglycemia-related complications persist in diabetic patients, 
indicating the existence of ‘hyperglycemic memory’ [173]. The phenomenon can be attributed to 
epigenetic remodeling of monocytes and HSCs [74, 173, 174]. Experimental studies have 
demonstrated that elevated glucose concentrations enhance proinflammatory gene expression in 
monocytes/macrophages through a glycolysis-dependent mechanism. The induced trained immunity 
subsequently promotes the progression of atherosclerosis in mice [71]. Bone marrow transfer from 
diabetic mice to normoglycemic Lldr-deficient recipients exacerbates atherosclerotic plaque 
development, confirming the persistence of hyperglycemia-induced trained immunity. The 
phenotype in HSCs is marked by alterations of H3K4me3 and H3K27ac levels and chromatin 
accessibility at pro-inflammatory genes. The open chromatin is associated with Runt-related 
transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), as its inhibition reverses this trained state [71]. These observations 
elucidate the pathways through which diabetes-associated proinflammatory states contribute to the 
development of various complications, particularly atherosclerosis.
(6) Endogenous alarmins
S100 alarmins, an important class of DAMPs, play essential roles in immune regulation and 
inflammatory disease pathogenesis. Preconditioning monocytes with S100A4 enhances their 
response to LPS re-stimulation, resulting in enhanced secretion of inflammatory mediators including 
IL-6 and TNFα [175]. This S100A4-induced trained immunity is mediated by a PRDM8-dependent 
mechanism. Ulash et al. have demonstrated that low concentrations of S100 alarmins in neonatal 
plasma are significantly associated with high susceptibility to neonatal sepsis. S100A8/A9 treatment 
protects mouse neonates from fatal sepsis, highlighting their immunomodulatory potential [176]. As 
TLR4 agonists, high level of S100A8/A9 alarmins induce trained immunity in human monocytes by 
promoting MyD88-dependent proinflammatory genes expression such as IL6, IL1B and TNF. 
Notably, they also promote a phenomenon known as “stress tolerance”, wherein phagocytes become 
unresponsive to a secondary TLR4 stimulus, thus mitigating excessive inflammatory damage [177]. 
This immune adaptation protects newborns by preventing overzealous inflammatory responses, 
thereby enhancing their resistance to inflammatory and septic diseases. 
Another type of endogenous alarmin, cathelicidins, are host-derived antimicrobial peptides 
constituting part of the innate immune system. van Dijk et al. demonstrated that monocytes trained 
with DCATH-2, a cathelicidin analog, exhibit enhanced proinflammatory responses and 
antimicrobial killing capacity [178]. The DCATH-2-induced trained immunity is mediated by 
purinergic receptors and depends on activation of the PI3K-mTOR-HIF1α axis and p38 MAPK 
signaling pathway. 
(7) Oxidized low-density lipoprotein
Oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL) plays a crucial role in both the initiation and chronic 
progression of atherosclerosis, in part by inducing a proinflammatory state of trained immunity in 
monocytes and macrophages [19, 179, 180]. After exposure to oxLDL, human monocytes undergo 
metabolic reprogramming through activation of the mitochondrial metabolic pathway, leading to a 
heightened state of responsiveness. This transformation is reflected not only by the enlargement of 
mitochondrial morphology and increased OXPHOS activity, but also by the accumulation of TCA 
cycle metabolites and the engagement of alternative pathways such as those involving glutamine and 
free fatty acids metabolism [179]. Such reprogramming provides a sustained energy source for 
oxLDL-trained macrophages, thereby enhancing their cytokine production capacity and 
inflammatory responses. Moreover, LXR, a key regulator of both metabolism and inflammation, is 
critically involved in oxLDL-induced trained immunity. Activation of LXRα specifically amplifies 
the inflammatory responses induced by oxLDL, while its inhibition blocks both epigenetic 
reprogramming and metabolic changes of trained immunity [180]. Furthermore, mTOR-dependent 
ROS production has been identified as a driver of this phenotype, highlighting potential therapeutic 
targets for atherosclerosis [19].
(8) Aldosterone
Aldosterone, a steroid hormone secreted by the adrenal cortex, is associated with increased 
cardiovascular risk when dysregulated. It promotes the generation of ROS in macrophages through 
the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) upon restimulation [181]. Interestingly, aldosterone-trained 
macrophages exhibit no significant increase in glycolysis or OXPHOS activity, distinguishing from 
β-glucan- or BCG-trained immunity [25]. Additional research revealed that aldosterone upregulates 
the epigenetic marker H3K4me3 at the promoter sites of key fatty acid biosynthesis genes such as 
FASN, ACACA and ELOVL6 [25]. This observation implies that the trained immunity established 
through aldosterone in vitro depends on epigenetic regulation of lipid metabolism. The resultant 
pro-inflammatory macrophage phenotype contributes to cardiovascular complications, implicating 
aldosterone-induced trained immunity in chronic disease development. 
(9) Catecholamine
Catecholamines, including adrenaline and noradrenaline, are pivotal neurotransmitters in the 
nervous system, which are primarily released under physical and emotional stress. High levels of 
catecholamines have been implicated to contribute to inflammatory monocytosis and atherosclerosis 
via interactions with adrenergic receptors [182]. Further study reveals that exposure of human 
monocytes to adrenaline and noradrenaline results in acute immunosuppressive effects followed by 
long-term trained immunity, as demonstrated by enhanced secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 upon LPS 
restimulation [12]. This catecholamines-induced trained immunity is mediated by the β-adrenergic 
receptor-cAMP pathway, alongside metabolic reprogramming involving augmented glycolysis and 
OXPHOS. In pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma (PHEO) patients characterized by persistently high 
catecholamine levels, monocytes exhibit transcriptional upregulation of inflammatory genes and 
H3K4me3 enrichment at key loci. This in vivo evidence confirms catecholamine-induced trained 
immunity and may explain the high cardiovascular disease burden observed in PHEO patients [12]. 
(10) Indoxyl sulfate
Indoxyl sulfate (IS), a uremic toxin found at elevated concentrations in patients with chronic 
kidney disease (CKD), contributes to systemic inflammation and cardiovascular complications. Kim 
et al. demonstrated that IS elicits trained immune responses in human monocytes via the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated arachidonic acid (AA) signaling cascade [82]. Moreover, 
IS-induced trained immunity has been confirmed in both ex vivo and in vivo models, implying its 
critical role in mediating chronic inflammatory responses in CKD patients. These findings position 
IS as a potential therapeutic target for managing inflammation and complications associated with 
CKD.
(11) Lactate
Lactate, traditionally viewed as a metabolic byproduct, is now recognized as a crucial signaling 
molecule in activating trained immunity. Recent studies reveal that lactate supports metabolic 
reprogramming of monocytes and macrophages by fueling the TCA cycle, thereby enhancing their 
long-term responsiveness to subsequent challenges [183, 184]. Trained monocytes are confirmed to 
preferentially utilize lactate over glucose as a TCA cycle substrate, and this metabolic shift is 
essential for their responses against infections [184]. Beyond its metabolic role, both endogenous and 
exogenous lactate promote trained immunity by increasing chromatin accessibility through 
LDHA-dependent histone lactylation. Supporting this, Ziogas et al. provide evidence that lactate 
production induced by BCG vaccination promotes sustained H3K18 lactylation in monocytes, 
linking epigenetic memory to enhanced secondary inflammatory responses [183]. Collectively, these 
findings indicate that lactate serves as a central link between immunometabolic activity and 
epigenetic regulation in trained immunity.
Table 3 Endogenous mediators inducing trained immunity 
Endogenous Inducers
Reported trained cell 
types
Mechanisms
Disease model
Reference
Cytokines
See Table 2
Itaconate, DMI
Monocytes
Mediate by 
glutathione synthesis
S. aureus infection
[169]
Fumarate
Monocytes, 
macrophages
Inhibit KDM5 histone 
demethylases, 
suppress HIF1α 
degradation, induce 
mitochondrial fusion
Pharyngeal infection by 
E. coli
[6, 7, 137, 
170]
Mevalonate
Monocytes
Activate the 
cholesterol synthesis 
pathway, Activate 
IGF1-R and mTOR 
pathways
HIDS
[30, 171]
24(S),25-Epoxycholesterol
Macrophages
Activate LXR 
signaling, increase 
melanoma, Lewis lung 
carcinoma
[172]
glycolysis
Glucose
Macrophages, 
monocytes, HSCs
Depend on glycolysis 
and RUNX1-related 
epidemic 
reprogramming
Hyperglycemia-promoted 
atherosclerosis
[71, 74, 
173]
S100 alarmins
Monocytes
Activate 
TLR4/MyD88 
pathway
Neonatal sepsis
[175-177]
Cathelicidin analogs
Differentiated THP-1 
cells
PI3K-mTOR-HIF1α 
and MAPK p38 
pathways
/
[178]
oxLDL
Monocytes, 
macrophages
Regulated by 
mTOR-dependent 
ROS production, 
activate LXR 
signaling
Atherosclerosis
[19, 179, 
180]
Aldosterone
Monocyte/macrophages
Upregulate fatty acid 
synthesis pathway
Cardiovascular diseases
[25, 181]
Catecholamine
Monocytes
β-adrenergic 
receptor-cAMP 
pathway
PHEO
[25]
Indoxyl sulfate
Monocytes
AhR-AA pathway
CKD
[82]
Lactate
Monocytes, 
macrophages
LDHA-dependent 
histone lactylation
C. albicans infection
[183, 184]
3.1.5
Non-canonical trained immunity inducers
(1) Other small-molecule inducers
The trained immunity inducers mentioned above are typically microbial pathogens (e.g., BCG), 
PAMPs (e.g., β-glucan), or endogenous metabolites. However, small-molecule inducers that are 
neither pathogen-derived nor disease-related have been rarely reported.
Through high-throughput screening, Knight et al. identified glucocorticoids, specifically 
flunisolide and hydrocortisone which are traditionally considered immunosuppressive agents, as 
novel inducers of trained immunity [185]. These non-immunogenic glucocorticoids exhibit distinct 
inflammatory signatures from classical inducers such as β-glucan. Specifically, while they suppress 
acute inflammation upon initial administration, they subsequently induce a trained phenotype in 
bone-marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) in a dose-dependent manner. This indicates that 
non-immunogenic molecule-induced trained immunity, when employed therapeutically, may not 
result in adverse inflammatory responses. Further investigations demonstrate that the 
glucocorticoids-induced trained immunity is dependent on glycolysis and changes in chromatin 
accessibility. In vivo results suggest that flunisolide potentiates TNF-α and IL-6 secretion by 
increasing the number of eosinophils that responsible for producing these cytokines [185]. 
In addition to glucocorticoids, Knight et al. also identified several other small molecules as 
trained immunity inducers, including 5-fluoroindole-2-carboxylic acid, myricetin, nerol, 
hydroquinone and fenoterol hydrobromide. Unlike glucocorticoids, these molecules trigger trained 
immunity independent of glycolytic pathway [185]. Moreover, another study from the same group 
discovered A1155463, an inhibitor of Bcl-xL, as a novel non-immunogenic trained immunity 
inducer [186]. Training BMDMs with nanomolar concentrations of A1155463 results in enhanced 
proinflammatory cytokines production upon LPS challenge, without causing apoptosis. This process 
is mediated by glycolysis. 
Other types of small molecules, including SHIP-1 inhibitors, STING agonists, LXR agonists, 
RORα antagonists, BIX-01294, oroxylin A, and 17β-estradiol, have also been found to possess 
capabilities to induce trained immunity [187-193] (Table 4). These findings broaden the spectrum of 
potential therapeutic agents that modulate trained immunity, although the precise molecular targets 
and signaling mechanisms by which these compounds induce trained immunity remain to be 
elucidated.
(2) Other macromolecular inducers
Flagellin, the principal structural protein of bacterial flagellate filamentum, is a unique PAMP 
recognized by PRRs such as TLR5 and NLR-family CARD-containing protein 4 (NLRC4), as well 
as by B and T cell receptors [194, 195]. Recognition of flagellin triggers both innate and adaptive 
immunity, facilitating the rapid elimination of pathogens from the host. Owing to its 
immunostimulatory properties, flagellin has been extensively investigated as a mucosal adjuvant in 
vaccine development [194]. Studies have demonstrated that pre-exposure to P. aeruginosa flagellin 
alters the inflammatory responses of bronchial epithelial cells (BECs) upon subsequent exposure to 
unrelated pathogens or LPS, in a manner dependent on epigenetic regulation [196]. Interestingly, 
flagellin can induce either trained immunity or tolerance depending on the characteristics and dosage 
of the secondary stimulus. In another study, initial exposure of monocytes to low concentrations of 
flagellin increased the response to secondary LPS stimulation, manifested as enhanced secretion of 
TNF-α and IL-6 [133]. This process is mediated by the p38 and JNK/MAPK signaling pathways, 
along with epigenetic modifications.
   Other macromolecular inducers of trained immunity, such as S. pneumonia endopeptidase O, 
Co1 peptide, leptin, monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA), and cholera toxin B subunit [197-201], are 
listed in Table 4. In contrast to nanobiologics, these inducers act directly on cellular signaling or 
epigenetic pathways without requiring a nanoparticle scaffold or delivery vehicle. Their activity is 
determined by intrinsic chemical structure rather than carrier-mediated modulation.
Table 4 Non-canonical trained immunity inducers
Inducer
Reported trained 
cell types
Mechanism
Disease model
Reference
Flunisolide, ydrocortisone
(Glucocorticoids)
BMDMs
Increase glycolysis
/
[185]
5-fluoroindole-2-carboxylic acid, 
myricetin, nerol, hydroquinone, 
fenoterol hydrobromide
BMDMs
/
/
[185]
A1155463
(Bcl-xL inhibitor)
BMDMs
Increase glycolysis
/
[186]
3α-aminocholestane
(SHIP-1 inhibitor)
BMDMs, myeloid 
cells
Activate Akt/mTOR 
pathway, increase glycolysis
C. albicans 
infection
[187]
DMXAA, c-di-AMP
(STING agonists)
Macrophages
Activate Akt/mTOR/HIF1α 
pathway
Clostridium 
perfringens 
infection, 
bladder cancer
[109, 188]
T1317, GW3965
(LXR agonists)
Monocytes
Activate mevalonate 
pathway and IL-1β 
signaling
/
[189]
SR3335
(RORα antagonists)
Peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs)
Depend on lactate 
dehydrogenase A (LDHA) 
and glycolysis
/
[190]
BIX-01294
(Lysine methyltransferase G9a 
inhibitor)
Monocytes
/
NMIBC
[191]
Oroxylin A
Macrophages
Increase glycolysis and 
mTOR phosphorylation, 
enhance LC3-associated 
phagocytosis via 
Dectin-1-syk axis
Sepsis
[192]
17β-Estradiol
Macrophages
Suppress nuclear 
translocation of RelB to 
regulate macrophage 
polarization
Sepsis
[193]
Flagellin
Monocytes, DCs, 
human sinonasal 
epithelial cells 
(HSNECs)
Recognized by TLR5 and 
NLRC4, activate MyD88 
signaling and JNK/MAPK 
pathways
Chronic 
rhinosinusitis
[133, 194, 
196]
S. pneumoniae endopeptidase O
Macrophages
Upregulate G-CSF 
expression
Various 
pathogenic 
infections
[197]
Co1 peptide
(Complement C5a receptor 
activator)
Macrophages
Activate the mTOR 
pathway
/
[198]
Leptin
Monocytes
/
Systemic 
inflammation in 
subjects with 
obesity
[199]
Monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA)
Macrophages
Activate TLR/MyD88 
pathway
S. aureus 
infection
[200]
Cholera toxin B subunit
DCs
/
Melanoma
[201]
3.2 Suppressors of trained immunity 
Some modulators of trained immunity can activate innate immune memory, but they elite 
immune suppression or tolerance upon secondary exposure to identical or different stimuli.
3.2.1 mTOR inhibitors
The mTOR/HIF1α axis-dependent glycolysis serves as the metabolic basis for the establishment of 
trained immunity [7]. Rapamycin, a potent mTOR inhibitor with significant immunosuppressive 
effects, is clinically used to prevent organ transplant rejection and treat autoimmune diseases. Cheng 
et al. demonstrated that rapamycin effectively inhibits β-glucan induced trained immunity [7]. 
Similarly, metformin, which activates AMPK and inhibits mTOR, has been shown to suppress 
trained immunity in vitro and reduce the protective effects against C. albicans infection in vivo [7]. 
At the mechanistic level, mTOR serves as a key sensor of the cellular metabolic state, 
orchestrating glucose metabolism and coordinating immune cell activation. Its inhibition suppresses 
HIF1α expression, thereby downregulating metabolic pathways such as aerobic glycolysis and the 
TCA cycle. These pathways generate metabolic intermediates such as acetyl-CoA and fumarate, 
which are critical for regulating histone modifications (e.g., acetylation and methylation) through 
modulation of enzymes such as histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone demethylases (e.g., 
KDM5). As a consequence, reduced mTOR signaling lowers histone acetylation (e.g., H3K27ac) and 
limits histone demethylation (e.g., H3K4me3), leading to the repression of pro-inflammatory gene 
transcription and cellular activation programs associated with trained immunity [6]. 
Moreover, rapamycin and related mTOR inhibitors have been shown to decrease the deposition of 
activating histone marks such as H3K4me3 and H3K27ac at promoters of inflammatory genes, 
thereby directly attenuating the enhanced transcriptional responsiveness of monocytes/macrophages 
upon secondary stimulation [6, 30]. Together, these findings support that mTOR inhibitors suppress 
trained immunity not only by altering metabolic pathways but also through shaping specific 
epigenetic landscapes, particularly histone methylation and acetylation, which control long-term 
transcriptional memory in innate immune cells.
Braza et al. developed a myeloid cell-specific nanoimmunotherapy based on mTOR 
inhibitor-high-density lipoprotein (mTORi-HDL), in which rapamycin is encapsulated in HDL 
nanoparticles [80]. Through H3K4me3 epigenetic modifications, this formulation effectively 
suppresses trained immunity, as evidenced by the inhibition of aerobic glycolysis and reduced 
release of inflammatory cytokines in macrophages. These trained macrophages not only block 
alloreactive CD8+ T cell-mediated responses but also facilitate the proliferation of tolerogenic CD4+ 
regulatory T cells (Tregs). Notably, the combination of mTORi-HDL treatment with TRAF6i-HDL 
nanoimmunotherapy, a co-stimulation inhibitor targeting CD40, results in long-term allograft 
survival [80]. This innovative translational therapy demonstrates potential for improving organ 
transplant success while minimizing the need for sustained immunosuppression. 
3.2.2 Anti-inflammatory cytokines
Anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10 and IL-35 exert crucial functions in immune 
tolerance and regulation of immune functions, with evidence showing that they inhibit acute 
activation of human aortic endothelial cells (HAECs) [163]. Among them, IL-35 demonstrates 
superior efficacy compared to IL-10 in inhibiting lipid lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC)-triggered 
innate immune gene expression in HAECs. LPC activates innate immunity through metabolic 
regulation of chromatin reprogramming and mitochondrial ROS regulation of transcriptional factors. 
Mechanistically, neither IL-10 nor IL-35 suppresses the reprogramming of crucial immunometabolic 
pathways induced by LPC; however, they partially suppress LPC-induced innate immunity via 
inhibiting mitochondrial ROS production [163]. Additionally, Röring et al. provide evidence that 
IL-10 suppresses trained immune responses in primary monocytic cells mainly by inhibiting STAT3 
signaling pathway and ROS production [202]. Furthermore, IL-10 downregulates glycolytic and 
oxidative metabolism but does not alter the metabolic signatures of β-glucan-induced trained 
immunity. 
  IL-37 and IL-38, two anti-inflammatory cytokines within the IL-1 family, have been demonstrated 
to abrogate the effect of trained immunity induced by β-glucan via blocking mTOR signaling in vivo. 
This is manifested by decreased generation of inflammatory mediators, reversal glycolysis 
reprogramming, and mitigation of epigenetic changes in BMDMs induced by β-glucan [165, 166]. 
IL-37 activates AMPK and subsequently suppresses mTOR. Furthermore, it directly inhibits IL-1β 
processing by blocking ASC oligomerization [203]. IL-38 has been reported to prevent β-glucan–
induced trained immunity and reverse the increase in H3K4me3-positive promoters observed in 
β-glucan-trained mice. IL-38 disrupts AKT/mTOR/S6K signaling in BMDMs and also 
downregulates HIF1α and IL-1β in synovial tissue cells. Moreover, the IL1F10-related SNP 
rs58965312 correlates with elevated plasma IL-38 levels and weakened β-glucan-induced trained 
immunity responses ex vivo [166]. These findings suggest potential applications of IL-37 and IL-38 
in treating cardiovascular disorders, chronic inflammatory conditions, and malignancies, although 
further research is needed to elucidate their precise roles in trained immunity.
3.2.3 MyD88 inhibitors
MyD88-dependent signaling is essential for TLR-induced trained immunity [200]. Its 
inhibition has been shown to ameliorate transplantation rejection. Treatment with TJ-M2010-5, a 
small-molecule MyD88 inhibitor, has been demonstrated to prolong xenograft survival in mice 
while suppressing systemic inflammation in xenograft recipients (SIXR) and mitigating acute 
vascular rejection (AVR) [204]. Mechanistically, TJ-M2010-5 impedes CCL-elicited nuclear 
translocation and phosphorylation of NF-κB p65 in BMDMs and bone marrow-derived dendritic 
cells 
(BMDCs), 
while 
also 
prevents 
epigenetic 
modifications 
(e.g., 
H3K4me3) 
at 
pro-inflammatory cytokine loci such as IL-6 and TNF-α. Moreover, MyD88 inhibition leads to 
downregulation of co-stimulatory markers CD80 and CD86, thereby reducing downstream innate 
immune responses [204]. Combining TJ-M2010-5 with an anti-CD154 antibody further augments 
the inhibitory effect on AVR and SIXR, thus prolonging graft survival.
3.2.4 Other types of trained immunity suppressors
The therapeutic application of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for managing 
SARS-CoV-2 infections remains controversial due to uncertainties surrounding their efficacy and 
mechanisms of action. Rother et al. demonstrated that both drugs diminish the generation of IL-6 
and TNF-α in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) trained with heat-killed C. albicans 
(HKCA) 
and 
subsequently 
restimulated 
with 
LPS 
or 
Pam3CSK4 
in 
vitro 
[205]. 
Hydroxychloroquine also inhibits the expression of genes stimulated by interferons and prevents 
histone modifications such as H3K27 acetylation and H3K4 trimethylation. Due to its alkaline 
side chain, hydroxychloroquine accumulates in lysosomes, potentially impairing lysosomal 
acidification and modulating mTOR signaling, which consequently suppresses trained immunity 
[205]. Furthermore, hydroxychloroquine alters cellular lipid metabolism by preventing the 
upregulation of phosphatidylinositol (PI) and phosphatidylserine (PS) lipids, further contributing 
to its immune-suppressive profile [205]. These findings indicate that hydroxychloroquine may 
have detrimental effects on the antiviral immune responses required for host defense against 
SARS-CoV-2 infection.
LXRs serve as essential regulators of cholesterol homeostasis and fatty acid metabolism. While 
LXR activation enhances BCG-induced trained immunity [189], LXR antagonism inhibits it. 
Findeisen et al. demonstrated that the LXR antagonist GSK2033 suppresses oxidized 
LDL-triggered trained immunity in monocytes by inhibiting aerobic glycolysis, cholesterol efflux, 
and fatty acid synthesis pathways [180]. Furthermore, it reduces histone alterations, including 
H3K27ac and H3Kme3 at the IL-6 and TNFα promotors. 
Other types of molecules, including itaconate, I-BET151, dihydroartemisinin, vitamin A, 
FhHDM-1, and short-chain fatty acids, have also been found to suppress trained immunity [168, 174, 
206-209] (Table 5). However, the specific molecular targets and signaling pathways by which these 
molecules suppress trained immune responses remain insufficiently explored. Furthermore, certain 
molecules such as resveratrol  exhibit controversial effects on trained immunity, highlighting the 
need for further investigation into their immunological roles [210]. 
Table 5 Modulators suppressing trained immunity
Inhibitor
Reported 
trained cell 
types
Mechanism
Disease model
Reference
Rapamycin, Metformin, 
mTORi-HDL (mTOR 
inhibitors)
Monocytes, 
macrophage
Inhibit the mTOR pathway
C. albicans infection, 
organ transplantation
[7, 80]
IL-10, IL-35, IL-37, IL-38 
(anti-inflammatory 
cytokines)
See Table 2
TJ-M2010-5
(MyD88 inhibitor)
BMDCs, 
BMDMs
Block MyD88/NF-κB 
signaling pathway，reduce the 
expression of CD80/CD86
Xenotransplantation 
model
[204]
GSK2033
(LXR antagonist)
Monocytes, 
macrophages
Inhibit LXR signaling 
pathway
/
[180]
Itaconate, DMI (under 
acute inflammatory 
condition)
Monocytes
Block SDH activity and 
inhibit TCA cycle
Endotoxemia
[168]
Hydroxychloroquine
Monocytes
Inhibit trained 
immunity-induced alterations 
in lipidome and histone 
modifications
SARS-CoV-2 infection, 
heat-killed C. albicans 
challenge
[205]
I-BET151
(Bromodomain inhibitor)
Monocytes
/
C. albicans infection
[206]
Dihydroartemisinin
BMDMs
Suppress the activation of 
AKT/mTOR/HIF1α pathway
Heat-killed C. albicans 
challenge
[207]
Vitamin A
Monocytes, 
macrophages
Increase H3K9me3 and 
activate the histone 
methyltransferase SUV39H2
/
[208]
Taken together, we present a comprehensive overview of the classifications and mechanisms of 
trained immunity inducers and suppressors identified over the past decade, including vaccines, 
polysaccharides, nanobiologics, endogenous mediators and other non-canonical modulators, with 
emphasis on their therapeutic potential in immune-related diseases. The trained immunity 
modulators and their associated signaling pathways are summarized in Fig. 4.
FhHDM-1
Macrophages
Inhibit histone methylation 
and glycolysis
Non-obese diabetes 
mellitus
[174]
Short-chain fatty acids
Monocytes, 
DCs
/
/
[209]
Fig. 4 Trained immunity modulators and their associated signaling pathways. Initial exposure to inducers 
(e.g., vaccines, polysaccharides, nanobiologics) initiates a succession of intracellular cascades that upregulate 
various metabolic pathways. The endogenous metabolites, such as fumarate, glucose and certain cytokines, also 
serve as pivotal regulators in shaping trained immune responses. Suppressors that downregulate those metabolic 
pathways or block chromatin accessibility inhibit trained immunity. The figure is created with Figdraw.com.
4.  Prospects and Conclusions
Trained immunity is a novel concept that has recently emerged, suggesting that innate immune 
cells possess memory properties. These cells undergo functional remodeling in response to primary 
exogenous or endogenous stimuli, leading to durable functional changes and enhanced inflammatory 
responses upon subsequent stimulation. Central mechanisms of trained immunity include metabolic 
alterations and epigenetic reprogramming, with ongoing efforts to elucidate the pathways and 
mechanisms involved. However, this fascinating new field of immunology still presents numerous 
questions warranting deeper explored. For example, the molecular mechanisms mediating trained 
immunity require more detailed characterization, including comprehensive investigations into both 
immune cell and non-immune cell populations capable of inducing trained immunity. Additionally, 
there is a need for refined insights into the metabolic, epigenetic and immunological processes that 
involved in trained immunity. Another critical research priority involves understanding the 
molecular mechanisms regulating interactions between innate and adaptive immunological 
mechanisms. The combination of trained immunity inducers with adaptive immunotherapy 
approaches (such as vaccines and immune checkpoint blockade therapies) may yield synergistic or 
unpredictable effects. These interactions could either enhance the efficacy of treatment or, 
conversely, increase the risk of adverse effects, thereby necessitating detailed mechanistic and 
translational studies. Comprehensive studies in these areas will not only deepen our understanding of 
trained immunity but also provide crucial insights for designing targeted therapeutic strategies to 
regulate trained immune responses. 
Other fascinating areas deserving further research include whether trained immunity can be 
inherited epigenetically across generations, and the impact of host microbiota on trained immune 
responses. Epigenetic reprogramming caused by trained immunity may have unpredictable long-term 
consequences. These alterations could potentially be inherited by future generations (epigenetic 
inheritance). While such transmission may confer benefits in certain contexts, it also raises concerns 
about unexpected genetic or epigenetic effects that may affect offspring. Moreover, the host 
microbiome serves as a key regulator in trained immunity modulation. However, the dynamic 
interactions between the microbiome and immune system complicate the use of trained immunity 
modulators. Variability in the microbiome between individuals could generate inconsistent 
responses, thereby limiting the general application of these immunomodulators.
Trained immunity has profound implications for disease prevention and therapeutic interventions 
that involve the immune system, including infections, cancers, and chronic inflammatory conditions. 
Traditional vaccines primarily work by stimulating the adaptive immune system, but trained 
immunity can be used to enhance the first line of defense in innate immune system. Trained 
immunity-promoting vaccines offer broader and faster protection against diverse pathogenic 
microorganisms, including bacteria, fungi and viruses, which could be particularly beneficial in 
preventing cross-infections. For instance, the BCG vaccine has been shown to confer non-specific 
protection against respiratory viral infections and certain malignancies through the induction of 
trained immunity [47, 48, 211]. 
Rather than relying solely on traditional immunization, developing therapies that specifically 
enhance trained immunity may be particularly valuable for vulnerable populations, such as the 
elderly and immunocompromised individuals, who tend to have weaker adaptive immune responses. 
Trained immunity-boosting immunotherapies can help combat persistent or recurrent infections, 
especially those caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria and fungi, and may also reduce the incidence 
of certain types of cancers. These strategies are largely beneficial in reducing the healthcare burden.
This review provides a comprehensive and up-to-date summary of trained immunity modulators 
(Fig. 3 and 4). Although many types of them show promising potential for use in various therapeutic 
settings, some limitations still remain, including:
(1) Druggability and safety. Most of the well-known trained immunity inducers reported to date 
are PAMPs, which are conserved molecules present in different species, such as polysaccharides 
derived from pathogenic microorganisms and plants. They are generally recognized by PRRs on the 
surface of a variety of specific immune and non-immune cells. However, the nonspecific nature of 
this recognition might lead to unwanted immune responses or a broad-spectrum activation of the 
immune system, potentially causing adverse effects or aggravating autoimmune diseases. 
Furthermore, although polysaccharides like β-glucan exhibit certain potential in the treatment of 
infections and cancers, several challenges remain, including issues related to low bioavailability, 
standardized production and quality control, and the safety of long-term use [121]. Future 
advancements in drug delivery technologies and additional clinical studies are needed to reduce these 
risks, making β-glucan a promising therapeutic agent in treating immune-related diseases.
(2) Duration of trained immunity. Even though trained immunity is long-lasting, it is not 
permanent. A comprehensive elucidation of the duration of trained immunity triggered by various 
stimuli, including vaccines, polysaccharides and nanobiologics, is essential. This impermanence 
represents an opportunity as well as a challenge. Pharmacologically, temporarily triggering trained 
immunity could overcome immune paralysis caused by infections, cancers or sepsis [16, 128, 156, 
211]. Meanwhile, once the disease is under control, it is crucial to mitigate the risk of long-term 
chronic inflammation by suppressing exogenously triggered trained immunity. On the contrary, for 
conditions such as organ transplantation, where suppressing trained immunity is beneficial, treatment 
should be discontinued once the therapeutic effect is achieved. 
(3) Risk of overstimulation and dysregulation of immune responses. Prolonged or inappropriate 
stimulation of trained immunity by inducers may result in excessive inflammatory responses or 
immune activation. This overstimulation might potentially increase the risk of autoimmune diseases 
or chronic inflammation. Therefore, when using trained immunity inducers, a balance should be 
struck between beneficial trained immune responses and preventing harmful immune responses. Due 
to the fact that trained immunity is contingent upon alterations in innate immune cell functional 
phenotypes, it may inadvertently lead to immune response dysregulation, such as inability to respond 
adequately to new pathogens or inappropriate immune responses to self-tissues. Some 
non-immunogenic compounds, such as glucocorticoids, have created novel avenues for the study and 
application of trained immunity, which can induce trained immunity without triggering inflammatory 
responses, or have a window period of active suppression of inflammation under acute inflammatory 
conditions [185]. However, the efficacy and mechanisms of these compounds in the treatment of 
related diseases through trained immunity remain to be fully elucidated. Natural products represent a 
major source of trained immunity modulators. In addition to the agents summarized in this review, 
several other molecules—such as certain natural host defense peptides and tumor-associated 
factors—also play roles in regulating innate immune responses [212, 213]. However, whether these 
molecules can drive the establishment of memory-like features in innate immune cells requires 
further investigation.
In conclusion, trained immunity is an attractive and constantly evolving concept in immunology, 
with profound influence on both health and disease. The recognition that innate immune cells, 
especially monocytic cells, macrophages and neutrophils, can undergo long-term functional 
reprogramming to generate memory under environmental stimulation, providing new avenues of 
therapeutic strategies for diseases like infections, cancers, and organ transplantation. Although the 
potential application of trained immunity is enormous, there are still considerable challenges in fully 
clarifying the potential mechanisms, optimizing the immunomodulators for clinical use, and ensuring 
their safety and efficacy in humans. The complicated interactions between trained immunity and 
adaptive immunity, and the influence of genetic predisposition and environmental determinants, 
should be further investigated to optimize the therapeutic benefit. Future research is essential for 
improving our knowledge of trained immunity, identifying more specific immunomodulators, and 
exploring their applications in different clinical settings. With continuous progress, trained immunity 
may become an indispensable part of personalized medicine, opening the way for new therapies for 
infectious diseases, cancers, and even autoimmune diseases.
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
Author Contributions
J. Chen, J. Yang and P. Cao conceived and designed the manuscript, J. Chen, C. Wang, S. Chen 
and M. Wang wrote and revise the manuscript, J. Yang, P. Cao, H. Cai, J. Chang and X. Cai edited 
the manuscript with conceptual advice. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of 
China (2023YFC2308200), the Jiangsu Province Science and Technology Development Project of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine (No. ZT202110), the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young 
Scholars (No. 82125037), the “New High School 20 Items” Project of Jinan (202333006), and the 
Taishan Scholars Program (tstp20231239).
References:
[1] Saba NF, Steuer CE, Ekpenyong A, McCook-Veal A, Magliocca K, Patel M, et al. 
Pembrolizumab and cabozantinib in recurrent metastatic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma: a 
phase 2 trial. Nat Med 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02275-x. 
[2] Skoulidis F, Araujo HA, Do MT, Qian Y, Sun X, Cobo AG, et al. CTLA4 blockade 
abrogates 
KEAP1/STK11-related 
resistance 
to 
PD-(L)1 
inhibitors. 
Nature 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41586-024-07943-7. 
[3] VanderWalde A, Bellasea SL, Kendra KL, Khushalani NI, Campbell KM, Scumpia PO, et 
al. Ipilimumab with or without nivolumab in PD-1 or PD-L1 blockade refractory metastatic 
melanoma: a randomized phase 2 trial. Nat Med 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41591-023-02498-y.
[4] Netea MG, Quintin J, van der Meer JW. Trained immunity: a memory for innate host 
defense. Cell Host Microbe 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2011.04.006.
[5] Saeed S, Quintin J, Kerstens HH, Rao NA, Aghajanirefah A, Matarese F, et al. Epigenetic 
programming of monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation and trained innate immunity. Science 
2014. doi: 10.1126/science.1251086.
[6] Arts RJ, Novakovic B, Ter Horst R, Carvalho A, Bekkering S, Lachmandas E, et al. 
Glutaminolysis and Fumarate Accumulation Integrate Immunometabolic and Epigenetic Programs in 
Trained Immunity. Cell Metab 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2016.10.008.
[7] Cheng SC, Quintin J, Cramer RA, Shepardson KM, Saeed S, Kumar V, et al. mTOR- and 
HIF-1α-mediated aerobic glycolysis as metabolic basis for trained immunity. Science 2014. doi: 
10.1126/science.1250684.
[8] Moorlag S, Folkman L, Ter Horst R, Krausgruber T, Barreca D, Schuster LC, et al. 
Multi-omics analysis of innate and adaptive responses to BCG vaccination reveals epigenetic cell 
states that predict trained immunity. Immunity 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2023.12.005.
[9] Buffen K, Oosting M, Quintin J, Ng A, Kleinnijenhuis J, Kumar V, et al. Autophagy 
controls BCG-induced trained immunity and the response to intravesical BCG therapy for bladder 
cancer. PLoS pathogens 2014. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004485.
[10] Sun SJ, Aguirre-Gamboa R, de Bree LCJ, Sanz J, Dumaine A, van der Velden WJFM, et 
al. BCG vaccination alters the epigenetic landscape of progenitor cells in human bone marrow to 
influence innate immune responses. Immunity 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.07.021.
[11] Kleinnijenhuis J, Quintin J, Preijers F, Benn CS, Joosten LA, Jacobs C, et al. Long-lasting 
effects of BCG vaccination on both heterologous Th1/Th17 responses and innate trained immunity. J 
Innate Immun 2014. doi: 10.1159/000355628.
[12] van der Heijden C, Groh L, Keating ST, Kaffa C, Noz MP, Kersten S, et al. 
Catecholamines Induce Trained Immunity in Monocytes In Vitro and In Vivo. Circ Res 2020. doi: 
10.1161/circresaha.119.315800.
[13] Romee R, Rosario M, Berrien-Elliott MM, Wagner JA, Jewell BA, Schappe T, et al. 
Cytokine-induced memory-like natural killer cells exhibit enhanced responses against myeloid 
leukemia. Sci Transl Med 2016. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaf2341.
[14] Mills TS, Kain B, Burchill MA, Danis E, Lucas ED, Culp-Hill R, et al. A distinct 
metabolic and epigenetic state drives trained immunity in HSC-derived macrophages from 
autoimmune mice. Cell Stem Cell 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2024.09.010.
[15] Mitroulis I, Ruppova K, Wang B, Chen LS, Grzybek M, Grinenko T, et al. Modulation of 
Myelopoiesis Progenitors Is an Integral Component of Trained Immunity. Cell 2018. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.034.
[16] Jurado LF, Daman AW, Li Z, Ross VMS, Nikolaou K, Tran KA, et al. A fungal-derived 
adjuvant amplifies the antitumoral potency of Bacillus Calmette-Guérin via reprogramming 
granulopoiesis. Immunity 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2025.05.026.
[17] Weizman OE, Song E, Adams NM, Hildreth AD, Riggan L, Krishna C, et al. Mouse 
cytomegalovirus-experienced ILC1s acquire a memory response dependent on the viral glycoprotein 
m12. Nat Immunol 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41590-019-0430-1.
[18] Hole CR, Wager CML, Castro-Lopez N, Campuzano A, Cai H, Wozniak KL, et al. 
Induction of memory-like dendritic cell responses in vivo. Nat Commun 2019. doi: 
10.1038/s41467-019-10486-5.
[19] Schnack L, Sohrabi Y, Lagache SMM, Kahles F, Bruemmer D, Waltenberger J, et al. 
Mechanisms of Trained Innate Immunity in oxLDL Primed Human Coronary Smooth Muscle Cells. 
Front Immunol 2019. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00013.
[20] Eljaszewicz A, Ruchti F, Radzikowska U, Globinska A, Boonpiyathad T, Gschwend A, et 
al. Trained immunity and tolerance in innate lymphoid cells, monocytes, and dendritic cells during 
allergen-specific immunotherapy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.08.042.
[21] Naik S, Larsen SB, Gomez NC, Alaverdyan K, Sendoel A, Yuan S, et al. Inflammatory 
memory sensitizes skin epithelial stem cells to tissue damage. Nature 2017. doi: 
10.1038/nature24271.
[22] Jeljeli M, Riccio LGC, Doridot L, Chêne C, Nicco C, Chouzenoux S, et al. Trained 
immunity 
modulates 
inflammation-induced 
fibrosis. 
Nat 
Commun 
2019. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41467-019-13636-x.
[23] Jentho E, Ruiz-Moreno C, Novakovic B, Kourtzelis I, Megchelenbrink WL, Martins R, et 
al. Trained innate immunity, long-lasting epigenetic modulation, and skewed myelopoiesis by heme. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2021. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2102698118.
[24] McBride MA, Stothers CL, Fensterheim BA, Caja KR, Owen AM, Hernandez A, et al. 
Bacteria- and fungus-derived PAMPs induce innate immune memory via similar functional, 
metabolic, and transcriptional adaptations. J Leukoc Biol 2024. doi: 10.1093/jleuko/qiad120.
[25] van der Heijden C, Keating ST, Groh L, Joosten LAB, Netea MG, Riksen NP. Aldosterone 
induces trained immunity: the role of fatty acid synthesis. Cardiovasc Res 2020. doi: 
10.1093/cvr/cvz137.
[26] Christ A, Günther P, Lauterbach MAR, Duewell P, Biswas D, Pelka K, et al. Western Diet 
Triggers 
NLRP3-Dependent 
Innate 
Immune 
Reprogramming. 
Cell 
2018. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2017.12.013.
[27] Moerings BGJ, van Bergenhenegouwen J, Furber M, Abbring S, Schols HA, Witkamp RF, 
et al. Dectin-1b activation by arabinoxylans induces trained immunity in human monocyte-derived 
macrophages. Int J Biol Macromol 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.04.071.
[28] Bhattarai S, Li Q, Ding J, Liang F, Gusev E, Lapohos O, et al. TLR4 is a regulator of 
trained immunity in a murine model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Nat Commun 2022. doi: 
10.1038/s41467-022-28531-1.
[29] Su H, Huang J, Weng S, Zhang B, Zhang T, Xu Y. Glutathione synthesis primes 
monocytes metabolic and epigenetic pathway for β-glucan-trained immunity. Redox Biol 2021. doi: 
10.1016/j.redox.2021.102206.
[30] Bekkering S, Arts RJW, Novakovic B, Kourtzelis I, van der Heijden C, Li Y, et al. 
Metabolic Induction of Trained Immunity through the Mevalonate Pathway. Cell 2018. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.025.
[31] Liu PS, Wang H, Li X, Chao T, Teav T, Christen S, et al. α-ketoglutarate orchestrates 
macrophage activation through metabolic and epigenetic reprogramming. Nat Immunol 2017. doi: 
10.1038/ni.3796.
[32] Zhou H, Lu X, Huang J, Jordan P, Ma S, Xu L, et al. Induction of Trained Immunity 
Protects Neonatal Mice Against Microbial Sepsis by Boosting Both the Inflammatory Response and 
Antimicrobial Activity. J Inflamm Res 2022. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S363995.
[33] Kalafati L, Kourtzelis I, Schulte-Schrepping J, Li X, Hatzioannou A, Grinenko T, et al. 
Innate Immune Training of Granulopoiesis Promotes Anti-tumor Activity. Cell 2020. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.058.
[34] Saaoud F, Liu L, Xu K, Cueto R, Shao Y, Lu Y, et al. Aorta- and liver-generated TMAO 
enhances trained immunity for increased inflammation via ER stress/mitochondrial ROS/glycolysis 
pathways. JCI Insight 2023. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.158183.
[35] Jia J, Ji W, Xiong N, Lin J, Yang Q. Trained immunity using probiotics and inactivated 
pathogens enhances resistance to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection by activating 
the cGAS-STING signal pathway in mice and chickens. J Adv Res 2025. doi: 
10.1016/j.jare.2025.03.011.
[36] Chen D, Wu J, Zhang F, Lyu R, You Q, Qian Y, et al. Trained immunity of intestinal tuft 
cells during infancy enhances host defense against enteroviral infections in mice. EMBO Mol Med 
2024. doi: 10.1038/s44321-024-00128-9.
[37] Netea MG, Joosten LA, Latz E, Mills KH, Natoli G, Stunnenberg HG, et al. Trained 
immunity: A program of innate immune memory in health and disease. Science 2016. doi: 
10.1126/science.aaf1098.
[38] Nankabirwa V, Tumwine JK, Mugaba PM, Tylleskär T, Sommerfelt H. Child survival and 
BCG vaccination: a community based prospective cohort study in Uganda. BMC Public Health 
2015. doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-1497-8.
[39] Jensen KJ, Larsen N, Biering-Sørensen S, Andersen A, Eriksen HB, Monteiro I, et al. 
Heterologous immunological effects of early BCG vaccination in low-birth-weight infants in 
Guinea-Bissau: a randomized-controlled trial. J Infect Dis 2015. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu508.
[40] de Souza RA, Barreto FR, de Jesus Lima CCO, da Natividade MS, de Souza Teles Santos 
CA, Ichihara MY, et al. Efficacy of BCG vaccination on incidence, severity and clinical progression 
of 
COVID-19: 
A 
BCG-REVAC 
population 
analysis. 
Vaccine 
2025. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.vaccine.2025.126911.
[41] Kumar NP, Padmapriyadarsini C, Rajamanickam A, Bhavani PK, Nancy A, Jeyadeepa B, 
et al. BCG vaccination induces enhanced humoral responses in elderly individuals. Tuberculosis 
(Edinb) 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2023.102320.
[42] Nemes E, Geldenhuys H, Rozot V, Rutkowski KT, Ratangee F, Bilek N, et al. Prevention 
of M. tuberculosis Infection with H4:IC31 Vaccine or BCG Revaccination. N Engl J Med 2018. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMoa1714021.
[43] Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Tsilika M, Moorlag S, Antonakos N, Kotsaki A, 
Domínguez-Andrés J, et al. Activate: Randomized Clinical Trial of BCG Vaccination against 
Infection in the Elderly. Cell 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.051.
[44] Chen J, Gao L, Wu X, Fan Y, Liu M, Peng L, et al. BCG-induced trained immunity: 
history, 
mechanisms 
and 
potential 
applications. 
J 
Transl 
Med 
2023. 
doi: 
10.1186/s12967-023-03944-8.
[45] Zimmermann P, Donath S, Perrett KP, Messina NL, Ritz N, Netea MG, et al. The influence 
of neonatal Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) immunisation on heterologous vaccine responses in 
infants. Vaccine 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.03.016.
[46] Walk J, de Bree LCJ, Graumans W, Stoter R, van Gemert GJ, van de Vegte-Bolmer M, et 
al. Outcomes of controlled human malaria infection after BCG vaccination. Nat Commun 2019. doi: 
10.1038/s41467-019-08659-3.
[47] Kang A, Ye G, Singh R, Afkhami S, Bavananthasivam J, Luo X, et al. Subcutaneous BCG 
vaccination protects against streptococcal pneumonia via regulating innate immune responses in the 
lung. EMBO Mol Med 2023. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202217084.
[48] Yu D, Gao X, Shao F, Liu Z, Liu A, Zhao M, et al. Antigen-presenting innate lymphoid 
cells induced by BCG vaccination promote a respiratory antiviral immune response through the 
skin‒lung axis. Cell Mol Immunol 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41423-025-01267-w.
[49] Brandi P, Conejero L, Cueto FJ, Martínez-Cano S, Dunphy G, Gómez MJ, et al. Trained 
immunity induction by the inactivated mucosal vaccine MV130 protects against experimental viral 
respiratory infections. Cell Rep 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.110184.
[50] Röring RJ, Debisarun PA, Botey-Bataller J, Suen TK, Bulut Ö, Kilic G, et al. MMR 
vaccination induces trained immunity via functional and metabolic reprogramming of γδ T cells. J 
Clin Invest 2024. doi: 10.1172/jci170848.
[51] Geckin B, Konstantin Föhse F, Domínguez-Andrés J, Netea MG. Trained immunity: 
implications for vaccination. Curr Opin Immunol 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2022.102190.
[52] Dos Santos JC, Barroso de Figueiredo AM, Teodoro Silva MV, Cirovic B, de Bree LCJ, 
Damen M, et al. β-Glucan-Induced Trained Immunity Protects against Leishmania braziliensis 
Infection: a Crucial Role for IL-32. Cell Rep 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.08.004.
[53] Moorlag S, Khan N, Novakovic B, Kaufmann E, Jansen T, van Crevel R, et al. β-Glucan 
Induces Protective Trained Immunity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infection: A Key Role for 
IL-1. Cell Rep 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.107634.
[54] Stothers CL, Burelbach KR, Owen AM, Patil NK, McBride MA, Bohannon JK, et al. 
β-Glucan Induces Distinct and Protective Innate Immune Memory in Differentiated Macrophages. J 
Immunol 2021. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.2100107.
[55] Zhang BZ, Shuai H, Gong HR, Hu JC, Yan B, Yuen TT, et al. Bacillus 
Calmette-Guérin-induced trained immunity protects against SARS-CoV-2 challenge in K18-hACE2 
mice. JCI Insight 2022. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.157393.
[56] Hilligan KL, Namasivayam S, Clancy CS, O'Mard D, Oland SD, Robertson SJ, et al. 
Intravenous administration of BCG protects mice against lethal SARS-CoV-2 challenge. J Exp Med 
2022. doi: 10.1084/jem.20211862.
[57] Perera DJ, Domenech P, Babuadze GG, Naghibosadat M, Alvarez F, Koger-Pease C, et al. 
BCG administration promotes the long-term protection afforded by a single-dose intranasal 
adenovirus-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. iScience 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2023.107612.
[58] Berg MK, Yu Q, Salvador CE, Melani I, Kitayama S. Mandated Bacillus Calmette-Guérin 
(BCG) vaccination predicts flattened curves for the spread of COVID-19. Sci Adv 2020. doi: 
10.1126/sciadv.abc1463.
[59] Netea MG, Ziogas A, Benn CS, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Joosten LAB, Arditi M, et al. 
The role of trained immunity in COVID-19: Lessons for the next pandemic. Cell Host Microbe 2023. 
doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2023.05.004.
[60] Sinha S, Ajayababu A, Thukral H, Gupta S, Guha SK, Basu A, et al. Efficacy of Bacillus 
Calmette-Guérin (BCG) Vaccination in Reducing the Incidence and Severity of COVID-19 in 
High-Risk Population (BRIC): a Phase III, Multi-centre, Quadruple-Blind Randomised Control Trial. 
Infect Dis Ther 2022. doi: 10.1007/s40121-022-00703-y.
[61] Tsilika M, Taks E, Dolianitis K, Kotsaki A, Leventogiannis K, Damoulari C, et al. 
ACTIVATE-2: A Double-Blind Randomized Trial of BCG Vaccination Against COVID-19 in 
Individuals at Risk. Front Immunol 2022. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.873067.
[62] Pereira SM, Barreto FR, de Souza RA, de Souza Teles Santos CA, Pereira M, da Paixão 
ES, et al. Previous BCG vaccination is associated with less severe clinical progression of COVID-19. 
BMC Med 2023. doi: 10.1186/s12916-023-02859-x.
[63] Escobar LE, Molina-Cruz A, Barillas-Mury C. BCG vaccine protection from severe 
coronavirus 
disease 
2019 
(COVID-19). 
Proc 
Natl 
Acad 
Sci 
U 
S 
A 
2020. 
doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2008410117.
[64] Gu J, Liu Q, Zhang J, Xu S. COVID-19 and trained immunity: the inflammatory burden of 
long covid. Front Immunol 2023. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1294959.
[65] Cheong JG, Ravishankar A, Sharma S, Parkhurst CN, Grassmann SA, Wingert CK, et al. 
Epigenetic memory of coronavirus infection in innate immune cells and their progenitors. Cell 2023. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.07.019.
[66] Vijayakumar B, Boustani K, Ogger PP, Papadaki A, Tonkin J, Orton CM, et al. 
Immuno-proteomic profiling reveals aberrant immune cell regulation in the airways of individuals 
with 
ongoing 
post-COVID-19 
respiratory 
disease. 
Immunity 
2022. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.immuni.2022.01.017.
[67] Friščić J, Böttcher M, Reinwald C, Bruns H, Wirth B, Popp SJ, et al. The complement 
system drives local inflammatory tissue priming by metabolic reprogramming of synovial 
fibroblasts. Immunity 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2021.03.003.
[68] Marzeda AM, Schwenzer A, Didov BS, Woolcock K, Richard JB, Jennings LK, et al. 
Investigating endogenous immune-mediated monocyte memory in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum 
Dis 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.ard.2025.03.016.
[69] Jeljeli MM, Adamopoulos IE. Innate immune memory in inflammatory arthritis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41584-023-01009-0.
[70] McDonald MM, Khoo WH, Ng PY, Xiao Y, Zamerli J, Thatcher P, et al. Osteoclasts 
recycle via osteomorphs during RANKL-stimulated bone resorption. Cell 2021. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2021.02.002.
[71] Edgar L, Akbar N, Braithwaite AT, Krausgruber T, Gallart-Ayala H, Bailey J, et al. 
Hyperglycemia Induces Trained Immunity in Macrophages and Their Precursors and Promotes 
Atherosclerosis. Circulation 2021. doi: 10.1161/circulationaha.120.046464.
[72] Simats A, Zhang S, Messerer D, Chong F, Beşkardeş S, Chivukula AS, et al. Innate 
immune memory after brain injury drives inflammatory cardiac dysfunction. Cell 2024. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2024.06.028.
[73] Dong Z, Hou L, Luo W, Pan LH, Li X, Tan HP, et al. Myocardial infarction drives trained 
immunity 
of 
monocytes, 
accelerating 
atherosclerosis. 
Eur 
Heart 
J 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1093/eurheartj/ehad787.
[74] Riksen NP, Bekkering S, Mulder WJM, Netea MG. Trained immunity in atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease. Nat Rev Cardiol 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41569-023-00894-y.
[75] Domínguez-Andrés J, Dos Santos JC, Bekkering S, Mulder WJM, van der Meer JWM, 
Riksen NP, et al. Trained immunity: adaptation within innate immune mechanisms. Physiol Rev 
2023. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00031.2021.
[76] Wendeln AC, Degenhardt K, Kaurani L, Gertig M, Ulas T, Jain G, et al. Innate immune 
memory 
in 
the 
brain 
shapes 
neurological 
disease 
hallmarks. 
Nature 
2018. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41586-018-0023-4.
[77] Dong H, Zhang X, Duan Y, He Y, Zhao J, Wang Z, et al. Hypoxia inducible factor-1α 
regulates microglial innate immune memory and the pathology of Parkinson's disease. J 
Neuroinflammation 2024. doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03070-2.
[78] Huang M, Malovic E, Ealy A, Jin H, Anantharam V, Kanthasamy A, et al. Microglial 
immune regulation by epigenetic reprogramming through histone H3K27 acetylation in 
neuroinflammation. Front Immunol 2023. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1052925.
[79] Noz MP, Ter Telgte A, Wiegertjes K, Joosten LAB, Netea MG, de Leeuw FE, et al. 
Trained Immunity Characteristics Are Associated With Progressive Cerebral Small Vessel Disease. 
Stroke 2018. doi: 10.1161/strokeaha.118.023192.
[80] Braza MS, van Leent MMT, Lameijer M, Sanchez-Gaytan BL, Arts RJW, Pérez-Medina 
C, et al. Inhibiting Inflammation with Myeloid Cell-Specific Nanobiologics Promotes Organ 
Transplant Acceptance. Immunity 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2018.09.008.
[81] Ochando J, Ortiz A. Trained immunity: from kidney failure to organ transplantation. Nat 
Rev Nephrol 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41581-024-00927-w.
[82] Kim HY, Kang YJ, Kim DH, Jang J, Lee SJ, Kim G, et al. Uremic toxin indoxyl sulfate 
induces trained immunity via the AhR-dependent arachidonic acid pathway in end-stage renal 
disease (ESRD). Elife 2024. doi: 10.7554/eLife.87316.
[83] Jonkman I, Jacobs MME, Negishi Y, Yanginlar C, Martens JHA, Baltissen M, et al. 
Trained immunity suppression determines kidney allograft survival. Am J Transplant 2024. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajt.2024.08.006.
[84] Paré JF, Tabasinezhad M, Grossman A, Atallah A, Hindmarch CCT, Tyryshkin K, et al. 
Association of Histone H3 Trimethylation in Circulating Monocytes with Lack of Early Recurrence 
in Patients with Bladder Cancer following BCG Induction Therapy. Bladder Cancer 2023. doi: 
10.3233/BLC-230028.
[85] Villumsen M, Sørup S, Jess T, Ravn H, Relander T, Baker JL, et al. Risk of lymphoma and 
leukaemia after bacille Calmette-Guérin and smallpox vaccination: a Danish case-cohort study. 
Vaccine 2009. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.08.103.
[86] Kremenovic M, Chan AA, Feng B, Bäriswyl L, Robatel S, Gruber T, et al. BCG hydrogel 
promotes CTSS-mediated antigen processing and presentation, thereby suppressing metastasis and 
prolonging survival in melanoma. J Immunother Cancer 2022. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2021-004133.
[87] Vaziri F, Setayesh T, Hu Y, Ravindran R, Wei D, Wan YY. BCG as an Innovative Option 
for HCC Treatment: Repurposing and Mechanistic Insights. Adv Sci (Weinh) 2024. doi: 
10.1002/advs.202308242.
[88] Moreo E, Jarit-Cabanillas A, Robles-Vera I, Uranga S, Guerrero C, Gómez AB, et al. 
Intravenous administration of BCG in mice promotes natural killer and T cell-mediated antitumor 
immunity in the lung. Nat Commun 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-41768-8.
[89] Singh S, Kishore D, Singh RK. "Trained Immunity" from Mycobacterium spp. exposure 
(BCG vaccination and environmental) may have an impact on the incidence of early childhood 
leukemia. Front Immunol 2023. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1193859.
[90] Usher NT, Chang S, Howard RS, Martinez A, Harrison LH, Santosham M, et al. 
Association of BCG Vaccination in Childhood With Subsequent Cancer Diagnoses: A 60-Year 
Follow-up of a Clinical Trial. JAMA Netw Open 2019. doi: 10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.12014.
[91] Liu L, Shi W, Xiao X, Wu X, Hu H, Yuan S, et al. BCG immunotherapy inhibits cancer 
progression by promoting the M1 macrophage differentiation of THP‑1 cells via the Rb/E2F1 
pathway in cervical carcinoma. Oncol Rep 2021. doi: 10.3892/or.2021.8196.  
[92] Lu Y, Huang X, Liu X, He Y, Hu Z, Xu W, et al. Remodels the Immunosuppressive Tumor 
Microenvironment by Combination of Bacillus Calmette-Guérin and Anti-PD-L1 in an Orthotopic 
Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Mouse Model. Onco Targets Ther 2021. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S294129.
[93] Kim YM, Choi JO, Cho YJ, Hong BK, Shon HJ, Kim BJ, et al. Mycobacterium potentiates 
protection from colorectal cancer by gut microbial alterations. Immunology 2023. doi: 
10.1111/imm.13586.
[94] Ding C, Shrestha R, Zhu X, Geller AE, Wu S, Woeste MR, et al. Inducing trained 
immunity in pro-metastatic macrophages to control tumor metastasis. Nat Immunol 2023. doi: 
10.1038/s41590-022-01388-8.
[95] Priem B, van Leent MMT, Teunissen AJP, Sofias AM, Mourits VP, Willemsen L, et al. 
Trained Immunity-Promoting Nanobiologic Therapy Suppresses Tumor Growth and Potentiates 
Checkpoint Inhibition. Cell 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.059.
[96] Jeong H, Koh J, Kim S, Yim J, Song SG, Kim H, et al. Cell-intrinsic PD-L1 signaling 
drives immunosuppression by myeloid-derived suppressor cells through IL-6/Jak/Stat3 in 
PD-L1-high lung cancer. J Immunother Cancer 2025. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2024-010612.
[97] Benn CS, Aaby P. Measles vaccination and reduced child mortality: Prevention of immune 
amnesia or beneficial non-specific effects of measles vaccine? J Infect 2023. doi: 
10.1016/j.jinf.2023.07.010.
[98] Gehrt L, Möller S, Englund H, Laake I, Nieminen H, Feiring B, et al. Vaccination against 
measles-mumps-rubella and rates of non-targeted infectious disease hospitalisations: Nationwide 
register-based cohort studies in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. J Infect 2025. doi: 
10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106365.
[99] Rieckmann A, Villumsen M, Sørup S, Haugaard LK, Ravn H, Roth A, et al. Vaccinations 
against smallpox and tuberculosis are associated with better long-term survival: a Danish case-cohort 
study 1971-2010. Int J Epidemiol 2017. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyw120.
[100] Yagovkina NV, Zheleznov LM, Subbotina KA, Tsaan AA, Kozlovskaya LI, Gordeychuk 
IV, et al. Vaccination With Oral Polio Vaccine Reduces COVID-19 Incidence. Front Immunol 2022. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.907341.
[101] Aaby P, Benn CS. Developing the concept of beneficial non-specific effect of live 
vaccines with epidemiological studies. Clin Microbiol Infect 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cmi.2019.08.011.
[102] Arunachalam PS, Scott MKD, Hagan T, Li C, Feng Y, Wimmers F, et al. Systems 
vaccinology 
of 
the 
BNT162b2 
mRNA 
vaccine 
in 
humans. 
Nature 
2021. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41586-021-03791-x.
[103] Soto JA, Gálvez NMS, Andrade CA, Ramírez MA, Riedel CA, Kalergis AM, et al. BCG 
vaccination induces cross-protective immunity against pathogenic microorganisms. Trends Immunol 
2022. doi: 10.1016/j.it.2021.12.006.
[104] Jeyanathan M, Vaseghi-Shanjani M, Afkhami S, Grondin JA, Kang A, D'Agostino MR, et 
al. Parenteral BCG vaccine induces lung-resident memory macrophages and trained immunity via 
the gut-lung axis. Nat Immunol 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41590-022-01354-4.
[105] Prentice S, Nassanga B, Webb EL, Akello F, Kiwudhu F, Akurut H, et al. BCG-induced 
non-specific effects on heterologous infectious disease in Ugandan neonates: an investigator-blind 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis 2021. doi: 10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30653-8.
[106] van Puffelen JH, Novakovic B, van Emst L, Kooper D, Zuiverloon TCM, Oldenhof UTH, 
et al. Intravesical BCG in patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer induces trained 
immunity 
and 
decreases 
respiratory 
infections. 
J 
Immunother 
Cancer 
2023. 
doi: 
10.1136/jitc-2022-005518.
[107] Flaig TW, Spiess PE, Abern M, Agarwal N, Bangs R, Buyyounouski MK, et al. NCCN 
Guidelines® Insights: Bladder Cancer, Version 3.2024. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 2024. doi: 
10.6004/jnccn.2024.0024.
[108] Li W, Moorlag S, Koeken V, Röring RJ, de Bree LCJ, Mourits VP, et al. A single-cell 
view on host immune transcriptional response to in vivo BCG-induced trained immunity. Cell Rep 
2023. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112487.
[109] Um PK, Praharaj M, Lombardo KA, Yoshida T, Matoso A, Baras AS, et al. Improved 
bladder cancer antitumor efficacy with a recombinant BCG that releases a STING agonist. bioRxiv 
2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.12.15.571740.
[110] Singh AK, Praharaj M, Lombardo KA, Yoshida T, Matoso A, Baras AS, et al. 
Re-engineered BCG overexpressing cyclic di-AMP augments trained immunity and exhibits 
improved efficacy against bladder cancer. Nat Commun 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28509-z.
[111] Föhse K, Debisarun PA, Kilic G, van Dodewaard-de Jong JM, Netea MG. Evaluation of 
the safety and immunological effects of Bacillus Calmette-Guérin in combination with checkpoint 
inhibitor therapy in a patient with neuroendocrine carcinoma: a case report. J Med Case Rep 2023. 
doi: 10.1186/s13256-023-04117-3.
[112] Daman AW, Antonelli AC, Redelman-Sidi G, Paddock L, Khayat S, Ketavarapu M, et al. 
Microbial cancer immunotherapy reprograms hematopoiesis to enhance myeloid-driven anti-tumor 
immunity. Cancer Cell 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2025.05.002.
[113] Derré L, Cesson V, Lucca I, Cerantola Y, Valerio M, Fritschi U, et al. Intravesical 
Bacillus Calmette Guerin Combined with a Cancer Vaccine Increases Local T-Cell Responses in 
Non-muscle-Invasive 
Bladder 
Cancer 
Patients. 
Clin 
Cancer 
Res 
2017. 
doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.Ccr-16-1189.
[114] Sørup S, Jensen AKG, Aaby P, Benn CS. Revaccination With Measles-Mumps-Rubella 
Vaccine and Infectious Disease Morbidity: A Danish Register-based Cohort Study. Clin Infect Dis 
2019. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciy433.
[115] Byberg S, Thysen SM, Rodrigues A, Martins C, Cabral C, Careme M, et al. A general 
measles vaccination campaign in urban Guinea-Bissau: Comparing child mortality among 
participants and non-participants. Vaccine 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.11.049.
[116] Lundberg L, Bygdell M, Stukat von Feilitzen G, Woxenius S, Ohlsson C, Kindblom JM, 
et al. Recent MMR vaccination in health care workers and Covid-19: A test negative case-control 
study. Vaccine 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.045.
[117] Debisarun PA, Gössling KL, Bulut O, Kilic G, Zoodsma M, Liu Z, et al. Induction of 
trained immunity by influenza vaccination - impact on COVID-19. PLoS Pathog 2021. doi: 
10.1371/journal.ppat.1009928.
[118] Cirovic B, de Bree LCJ, Groh L, Blok BA, Chan J, van der Velden W, et al. BCG 
Vaccination in Humans Elicits Trained Immunity via the Hematopoietic Progenitor Compartment. 
Cell Host Microbe 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.05.014.
[119] García González LA, Arrutia Díez F. Mucosal bacterial immunotherapy with MV130 
highly reduces the need of tonsillectomy in adults with recurrent tonsillitis. Hum Vaccin Immunother 
2019. doi: 10.1080/21645515.2019.1581537.
[120] MontalbáonHernández K, Cogollo-GarcíogA, Girón de Velasco-Sada P, Caballero R, 
Casanovas M, Subiza JL, et al. MV130 in the Prevention of Recurrent Respiratory Tract Infections: 
A Retrospective Real-World Study in Children and Adults. Vaccines (Basel) 2024. doi: 
10.3390/vaccines12020172. 
[121] Laroche C, Michaud P. New developments and prospective applications for beta (1,3) 
glucans. Recent Pat Biotechnol 2007. doi: 10.2174/187220807779813938.
[122] Wattenberg MM, Coho H, Herrera VM, Graham K, Stone ML, Xue Y, et al. Cancer 
immunotherapy via synergistic coactivation of myeloid receptors CD40 and Dectin-1. Sci Immunol 
2023. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.adj5097.
[123] Assouline B, Kahn R, Hodali L, Condiotti R, Engel Y, Elyada E, et al. Senescent 
cancer-associated fibroblasts in pancreatic adenocarcinoma restrict CD8+ T cell activation and limit 
responsiveness to immunotherapy in mice. Nat Commun 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50441-7.
[124] Geller AE, Shrestha R, Woeste MR, Guo H, Hu X, Ding C, et al. The induction of 
peripheral trained immunity in the pancreas incites anti-tumor activity to control pancreatic cancer 
progression. Nat Commun 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28407-4.
[125] Woeste MR, Shrestha R, Geller AE, Li S, Montoya-Durango D, Ding C, et al. Irreversible 
electroporation augments β-glucan induced trained innate immunity for the treatment of pancreatic 
ductal adenocarcinoma. J Immunother Cancer 2023. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2022-006221.
[126] Wang Q, Jiang H, Zhang H, Lu W, Wang X, Xu W, et al. β-Glucan-conjugated 
anti-PD-L1 antibody enhances antitumor efficacy in preclinical mouse models. Carbohydr Polym 
2024. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.121564.
[127] Foster BM, Shi L, Harris KS, Patel C, Surratt VE, Langsten KL, et al. Bone 
Marrow-Derived Stem Cell Factor Regulates Prostate Cancer-Induced Shifts in Pre-Metastatic Niche 
Composition. Front Oncol 2022. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.855188.
[128] Pan Y, Li J, Xia X, Wang J, Jiang Q, Yang J, et al. β-glucan-coupled superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles induce trained immunity to protect mice against sepsis. Theranostics 2022. 
doi: 10.7150/thno.64874.
[129] Jin JW, Tang SQ, Rong MZ, Zhang MQ. Synergistic effect of dual targeting vaccine 
adjuvant with aminated β-glucan and CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides for both humoral and cellular 
immune responses. Acta Biomater 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2018.08.002.
[130] Chen Z, Yong T, Wei Z, Zhang X, Li X, Qin J, et al. Engineered Probiotic-Based 
Personalized Cancer Vaccine Potentiates Antitumor Immunity through Initiating Trained Immunity. 
Adv Sci (Weinh) 2024. doi: 10.1002/advs.202305081.
[131] Li D, Li W, Zheng P, Yang Y, Liu Q, Hu Y, et al. A "trained immunity" 
inducer-adjuvanted nanovaccine reverses the growth of established tumors in mice. J 
Nanobiotechnology 2023. doi: 10.1186/s12951-023-01832-3.
[132] Kang A, Ye G, Afkhami S, Aleithan F, Singh K, Dvorkin-Gheva A, et al. LPS-induced 
lung tissue-resident trained innate immunity provides differential protection against pneumococci 
and SARS-CoV-2. Cell Rep 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114849.
[133] Ifrim DC, Quintin J, Joosten LA, Jacobs C, Jansen T, Jacobs L, et al. Trained immunity or 
tolerance: opposing functional programs induced in human monocytes after engagement of various 
pattern recognition receptors. Clin Vaccine Immunol 2014. doi: 10.1128/cvi.00688-13.
[134] Zhong Y, Ye P, Mei Z, Huang S, Huang M, Li Y, et al. The novel methyltransferase 
SETD4 regulates TLR agonist-induced expression of cytokines through methylation of lysine 4 at 
histone 3 in macrophages. Mol Immunol 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2019.07.011.
[135] Yoshida K, Maekawa T, Zhu Y, Renard-Guillet C, Chatton B, Inoue K, et al. The 
transcription factor ATF7 mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced epigenetic changes in macrophages 
involved in innate immunological memory. Nat Immunol 2015. doi: 10.1038/ni.3257.
[136] de Laval B, Maurizio J, Kandalla PK, Brisou G, Simonnet L, Huber C, et al. 
C/EBPβ-Dependent Epigenetic Memory Induces Trained Immunity in Hematopoietic Stem Cells. 
Cell Stem Cell 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2020.01.017.
[137] Tannahill GM, Curtis AM, Adamik J, Palsson-McDermott EM, McGettrick AF, Goel G, 
et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1β through HIF-1α. Nature 2013. doi: 
10.1038/nature11986.
[138] Zahalka S, Starkl P, Watzenboeck ML, Farhat A, Radhouani M, Deckert F, et al. Trained 
immunity of alveolar macrophages requires metabolic rewiring and type 1 interferon signaling. 
Mucosal Immunol 2022. doi: 10.1038/s41385-022-00528-5.
[139] Novakovic B, Habibi E, Wang SY, Arts RJW, Davar R, Megchelenbrink W, et al. 
β-Glucan Reverses the Epigenetic State of LPS-Induced Immunological Tolerance. Cell 2016. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.034.
[140] Abhimanyu, Longlax SC, Nishiguchi T, Ladki M, Sheikh D, Martinez AL, et al. TCA 
metabolism regulates DNA hypermethylation in LPS and Mycobacterium tuberculosis-induced 
immune tolerance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2024. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2404841121.
[141] Maia A, Cardona Gloria Y, Fuchs K, Chang TH, Engels P, Zhou M, et al. Chitin 
oligomers promote lymphoid innate and adaptive immune cell activation. J Leukoc Biol 2023. doi: 
10.1093/jleuko/qiad044.
[142] Chen DD, Wang ZB, Wang LX, Zhao P, Yun CH, Bai L. Structure, catalysis, chitin 
transport, 
and 
selective 
inhibition 
of 
chitin 
synthase. 
Nat 
Commun 
2023. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41467-023-40479-4.
[143] Chang TH, Cardona Gloria Y, Hellmann MJ, Richardo T, Greve CL, Le Roy D, et al. 
Transkingdom mechanism of MAMP generation by chitotriosidase feeds oligomeric chitin from 
fungal pathogens and allergens into TLR2-mediated innate immune sensing. Front Immunol 2025. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2025.1497174.
[144] Honorato L, Bonilla JJA, Valdez AF, Frases S, Araúa, GRdS, Sabino ALRdN, et al. 
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is the major pattern recognition receptor triggering the protective effect 
of a Candida albicans extracellular vesicle-based vaccine prototype in murine systemic candidiasis. 
mSphere 2024. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00467-24.
[145] Wei X, Liu C, Li Z, Gu Z, Yang J, Luo K. Chitosan-based hydrogel dressings for diabetic 
wound healing via promoting M2 macrophage-polarization. Carbohydr Polym 2024. doi: 
10.1016/j.carbpol.2024.121873.
[146] Rizzetto L, Ifrim DC, Moretti S, Tocci N, Cheng SC, Quintin J, et al. Fungal Chitin 
Induces Trained Immunity in Human Monocytes during Cross-talk of the Host with Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. J Biol Chem 2016. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.699645.
[147] Iliev ID, Funari VA, Taylor KD, Nguyen Q, Reyes CN, Strom SP, et al. Interactions 
between commensal fungi and the C-type lectin receptor Dectin-1 influence colitis. Science 2012. 
doi: 10.1126/science.1221789.
[148] Liu G, Ma N, Cheng K, Feng Q, Ma X, Yue Y, et al. Bacteria-derived nanovesicles 
enhance 
tumour 
vaccination 
by 
trained 
immunity. 
Nat 
Nanotechnol 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1038/s41565-023-01553-6.
[149] Liang J, Zhu F, Cheng K, Ma N, Ma X, Feng Q, et al. Outer Membrane Vesicle-Based 
Nanohybrids Target Tumor-Associated Macrophages to Enhance Trained Immunity-Related 
Vaccine-Generated Antitumor Activity. Adv Mater 2023. doi: 10.1002/adma.202306158.
[150] Gong Y, Hao W, Xu L, Yang Y, Dong Z, Pan P, et al. BCG-Derived Outer Membrane 
Vesicles Induce TLR2-Dependent Trained Immunity to Protect Against Polymicrobial Sepsis. Adv 
Sci (Weinh) 2025. doi: 10.1002/advs.202504101.
[151] Arts RJW, Moorlag S, Novakovic B, Li Y, Wang SY, Oosting M, et al. BCG Vaccination 
Protects against Experimental Viral Infection in Humans through the Induction of Cytokines 
Associated with Trained Immunity. Cell Host Microbe 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2017.12.010.
[152] Flores-Gomez D, Hobo W, van Ens D, Kessler EL, Novakovic B, Schaap NPM, et al. 
Interleukin-1β induces trained innate immunity in human hematopoietic progenitor cells in vitro. 
Stem cell reports 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2024.09.004.
[153] Khan N, Downey J, Sanz J, Kaufmann E, Blankenhaus B, Pacis A, et al. M. tuberculosis 
Reprograms Hematopoietic Stem Cells to Limit Myelopoiesis and Impair Trained Immunity. Cell 
2020. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.09.062.
[154] Tran KA, Pernet E, Sadeghi M, Downey J, Chronopoulos J, Lapshina E, et al. BCG 
immunization induces CX3CR1(hi) effector memory T cells to provide cross-protection via 
IFN-γ-mediated trained immunity. Nat Immunol 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41590-023-01739-z.
[155] Lundahl MLE, Mitermite M, Ryan DG, Case S, Williams NC, Yang M, et al. 
Macrophage innate training induced by IL-4 and IL-13 activation enhances OXPHOS driven 
anti-mycobacterial responses. Elife 2022. doi: 10.7554/eLife.74690.
[156] Schrijver DP, Röring RJ, Deckers J, de Dreu A, Toner YC, Prevot G, et al. Resolving 
sepsis-induced immunoparalysis via trained immunity by targeting interleukin-4 to myeloid cells. 
Nat Biomed Eng 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41551-023-01050-0.
[157] Zhu S, Zhang C, Sun Q, Wang Y, Yu W, Wei F, et al. Trained Immunity of IL-12-, 
IL-15-, 
and 
IL-18-Induced 
CD(3)+CD(56)+ 
NKT-Like 
Cells. 
J 
Oncol 
2022. 
doi: 
10.1155/2022/8724933.
[158] Teufel LU, Arts RJW, Netea MG, Dinarello CA, Joosten LAB. IL-1 family cytokines as 
drivers and inhibitors of trained immunity. Cytokine 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2021.155773.
[159] Teufel LU, Joosten LAB, Dos Santos JC. Immunotherapeutic Potential of Interleukin-32 
and 
Trained 
Immunity 
for 
Leishmaniasis 
Treatment. 
Trends 
Parasitol 
2021. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.pt.2020.09.014.
[160] Teufel LU, Netea MG, van de Veerdonk FL, Dinarello CA, Joosten LAB, Arts RJW. 
Opposing Effects of Interleukin-36γ and Interleukin-38 on Trained Immunity. Int J Mol Sci 2023. 
doi: 10.3390/ijms24032311.
[161] Borriello F, Iannone R, Di Somma S, Loffredo S, Scamardella E, Galdiero MR, et al. 
GM-CSF and IL-3 Modulate Human Monocyte TNF-α Production and Renewal in In Vitro Models 
of Trained Immunity. Front Immunol 2016. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2016.00680.
[162] Guerrero P, Bono C, Sobén M, Guiu A, Cheng QJ, Gil ML, et al. GM-CSF receptor 
expression determines opposing innate memory phenotypes at different stages of myelopoiesis. 
Blood 2024. doi: 10.1182/blood.2024024330.
[163] Li X, Fang P, Sun Y, Shao Y, Yang WY, Jiang X, et al. Anti-inflammatory cytokines 
IL-35 and IL-10 block atherogenic lysophosphatidylcholine-induced, mitochondrial ROS-mediated 
innate immune activation, but spare innate immune memory signature in endothelial cells. Redox 
Biol 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2019.101373.
[164] Röring RJ, Scognamiglio F, de Jong LC, Groh LA, Matzaraki V, Koeken V, et al. 
Interleukin-10 inhibits important components of trained immunity in human monocytes. J Leukoc 
Biol 2024. doi: 10.1093/jleuko/qiae240.
[165] Cavalli G, Tengesdal IW, Gresnigt M, Nemkov T, Arts RJW, Domínguez-Andrés J, et al. 
The anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-37 is an inhibitor of trained immunity. Cell Rep 2021. 
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108955.
[166] de Graaf DM, Teufel LU, van de Veerdonk FL, Joosten LAB, Netea MG, Dinarello CA, 
et al. IL-38 prevents induction of trained immunity by inhibition of mTOR signaling. J Leukoc Biol 
2021. doi: 10.1002/jlb.3a0220-143rrr.
[167] Singh S, Singh PK, Jha A, Naik P, Joseph J, Giri S, et al. Integrative metabolomics and 
transcriptomics identifies itaconate as an adjunct therapy to treat ocular bacterial infection. Cell Rep 
Med 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2021.100277.
[168] Domínguez-Andrés J, Novakovic B, Li Y, Scicluna BP, Gresnigt MS, Arts RJW, et al. 
The Itaconate Pathway Is a Central Regulatory Node Linking Innate Immune Tolerance and Trained 
Immunity. Cell Metab 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2018.09.003.
[169] Ferreira AV, Kostidis S, Groh LA, Koeken V, Bruno M, Baydemir I, et al. Dimethyl 
itaconate induces long-term innate immune responses and confers protection against infection. Cell 
Rep 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112658.
[170] Pérez-Hernández CA, Kern CC, Butkeviciute E, McCarthy E, Dockrell HM, 
Moreno-Altamirano MMB, et al. Mitochondrial Signature in Human Monocytes and Resistance to 
Infection in C. elegans During Fumarate-Induced Innate Immune Training. Front Immunol 2020. 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01715.
[171] Muller AL, Freed DH. Basic and Clinical Observations of Mevalonate Depletion on the 
Mevalonate 
Signaling 
Pathway. 
Curr 
Mol 
Pharmacol 
2017. 
doi: 
10.2174/1874467209666160112125805.
[172] Liu Y, Wang Z, Jin H, Cui L, Huo B, Xie C, et al. Squalene-epoxidase-catalyzed 
24(S),25-epoxycholesterol synthesis promotes trained-immunity-mediated antitumor activity. Cell 
Rep 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114094.
[173] Thiem K, Keating ST, Netea MG, Riksen NP, Tack CJ, van Diepen J, et al. 
Hyperglycemic Memory of Innate Immune Cells Promotes In Vitro Proinflammatory Responses of 
Human Monocytes and Murine Macrophages. J Immunol 2021. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1901348.
[174] Quinteros SL, Snyder NW, Chatoff A, Ryan F, O'Brien B, Donnelly S. The 
helminth-derived peptide, FhHDM-1, reverses the trained phenotype of NOD bone-marrow-derived 
macrophages 
and 
regulates 
proinflammatory 
responses. 
Eur 
J 
Immunol 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1002/eji.202350643.
[175] Neidhart M, Pajak A, Laskari K, Riksen NP, Joosten LAB, Netea MG, et al. Oligomeric 
S100A4 Is Associated With Monocyte Innate Immune Memory and Bypass of Tolerance to 
Subsequent 
Stimulation 
With 
Lipopolysaccharides. 
Front 
Immunol 
2019. 
doi: 
10.3389/fimmu.2019.00791.
[176] Ulas T, Pirr S, Fehlhaber B, Bickes MS, Loof TG, Vogl T, et al. S100-alarmin-induced 
innate immune programming protects newborn infants from sepsis. Nat Immunol 2017. doi: 
10.1038/ni.3745.
[177] Freise N, Burghard A, Ortkras T, Daber N, Imam Chasan A, Jauch SL, et al. Signaling 
mechanisms inducing hyporesponsiveness of phagocytes during systemic inflammation. Blood 2019. 
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019000320.
[178] van Dijk A, Anten J, Bakker A, Evers N, Hoekstra AT, Chang JC, et al. Innate Immune 
Training of Human Macrophages by Cathelicidin Analogs. Front Immunol 2022. doi: 
10.3389/fimmu.2022.777530.
[179] Groh LA, Ferreira AV, Helder L, van der Heijden C, Novakovic B, van de Westerlo E, et 
al. oxLDL-Induced Trained Immunity Is Dependent on Mitochondrial Metabolic Reprogramming. 
Immunometabolism 2021. doi: 10.20900/immunometab20210025.
[180] Findeisen HM, Voges VC, Braun LC, Sonnenberg J, Schwarz D, Körner H, et al. LXRα 
Regulates oxLDL-Induced Trained Immunity in Macrophages. Int J Mol Sci 2022. doi: 
10.3390/ijms23116166.
[181] Matarese G, Norata GD. Hormonal control of trained immunity: aldosterone at the 
crossroad between activation of innate immunity and cardiovascular diseases. Cardiovasc Res 2020. 
doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvz191.
[182] Chen Y, Guo X, Zeng Y, Mo X, Hong S, He H, et al. Ferroptosis contributes to 
catecholamine-induced cardiotoxicity and pathological remodeling. Free Radic Biol Med 2023. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2023.07.025. 
[183] Ziogas A, Novakovic B, Ventriglia L, Galang N, Tran KA, Li W, et al. Long-term histone 
lactylation connects metabolic and epigenetic rewiring in innate immune memory. Cell 2025. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2025.03.048.
[184] Cai H, Chen X, Liu Y, Chen Y, Zhong G, Chen X, et al. Lactate activates trained 
immunity by fueling the tricarboxylic acid cycle and regulating histone lactylation. Nat Commun 
2025. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-58563-2.
[185] Knight HR, Ketter E, Ung T, Weiss A, Ajit J, Chen Q, et al. High-throughput screen 
identifies non inflammatory small molecule inducers of trained immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2024. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2400413121.
[186] Ajit J, Knight HR, Chen Q, Solanki A, Shen J, Kahn APE. Novel non-immunogenic 
trained immunity inducing small molecule with improved anti-tumor properties. bioRxiv 2024. doi: 
10.1101/2024.03.22.585780.
[187] Saz-Leal P, Del Fresno C, Brandi P, Martínez-Cano S, Dungan OM, Chisholm JD, et al. 
Targeting SHIP-1 in Myeloid Cells Enhances Trained Immunity and Boosts Response to Infection. 
Cell Rep 2018. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.09.092.
[188] Liu ZZ, Zhou CK, Lin XQ, Gao Y, Luo XY, Zhang JB, et al. STING-dependent trained 
immunity contributes to host defense against Clostridium perfringens infection via mTOR signaling. 
Vet Res 2024. doi: 10.1186/s13567-024-01301-1.
[189] Sohrabi Y, Sonntag GVH, Braun LC, Lagache SMM, Liebmann M, Klotz L, et al. LXR 
Activation Induces a Proinflammatory Trained Innate Immunity-Phenotype in Human Monocytes. 
Front Immunol 2020. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00353.
[190] Kilic G, Matzaraki V, Bulut O, Baydemir I, Ferreira AV, Rabold K, et al. RORα 
negatively 
regulates 
BCG-induced 
trained 
immunity. 
Cell 
Immunol 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.cellimm.2024.104862.
[191] Mourits VP, van Puffelen JH, Novakovic B, Bruno M, Ferreira AV, Arts RJ, et al. Lysine 
methyltransferase G9a is an important modulator of trained immunity. Clin Transl Immunology 
2021. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1253.
[192] Yin L, Bing Z, Zheng Y, Pan Y, Dong Y, Wang J, et al. Oroxylin A-induced Trained 
Immunity Promotes LC3-associated Phagocytosis in Macrophage in Protecting Mice Against Sepsis. 
Inflammation 2024. doi: 10.1007/s10753-024-02033-2.
[193] Sun Z, Pan Y, Qu J, Xu Y, Dou H, Hou Y. 17β-Estradiol Promotes Trained Immunity in 
Females Against Sepsis via Regulating Nucleus Translocation of RelB. Front Immunol 2020. doi: 
10.3389/fimmu.2020.01591.
[194] Vijay-Kumar M, Bovilla VR, Yeoh BS, Golonka RM, Saha P, Joe B, et al. Bacterial 
flagellin is a dominant, stable innate immune activator in the gastrointestinal contents of mice and 
rats. Gut Microbes 2023. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2185031.
[195] An Y, Zhai Z, Wang X, Ding Y, He L, Li L, et al. Targeting Desulfovibrio vulgaris 
flagellin-induced NAIP/NLRC4 inflammasome activation in macrophages attenuates ulcerative 
colitis. J Adv Res 2023. doi: 10.1016/j.jare.2023.08.008.
[196] Bigot J, Guillot L, Guitard J, Ruffin M, Corvol H, Chignard M, et al. Respiratory 
Epithelial Cells Can Remember Infection: A Proof-of-Concept Study. J Infect Dis 2020. doi: 
10.1093/infdis/jiz569.
[197] Xu W, Yuan Y, Shu Z, Guo T, Liu B, Xiao J, et al. Streptococcus pneumoniae 
endopeptidase O induces trained immunity and confers protection against various pathogenic 
infections. Clin Immunol 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2024.110226.
[198] Shim EH, Kim SH, Kim DJ, Jang YS. Complement C5a Receptor Signaling in 
Macrophages Enhances Trained Immunity Through mTOR Pathway Activation. Immune Netw 
2024. doi: 10.4110/in.2024.24.e24.
[199] Flores Gomez D, Bekkering S, Ter Horst R, Cossins B, van den Munckhof ICL, Rutten 
JHW, et al. The effect of leptin on trained innate immunity and on systemic inflammation in subjects 
with obesity. J Leukoc Biol 2024. doi: 10.1093/jleuko/qiad118.
[200] Owen AM, Luan L, Burelbach KR, McBride MA, Stothers CL, Boykin OA, et al. 
MyD88-dependent signaling drives toll-like receptor-induced trained immunity in macrophages. 
Front Immunol 2022. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1044662.
[201] Tepale-Segura A, Gajón JA, Muñoz-Cruz S, Castro-Escamilla O, Bonifaz LC. The 
cholera toxin B subunit induces trained immunity in dendritic cells and promotes CD8 T cell 
antitumor immunity. Front Immunol 2024. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1362289.
[202] Röring RJ, Scognamiglio F, de Jong LC, Groh LA, Matzaraki V, Koeken V, et al. 
Interleukin-10 inhibits important components of trained immunity in human monocytes. J Leukoc 
Biol 2025. doi: 10.1093/jleuko/qiae240.
[203] Rudloff I, Ung HK, Dowling JK, Mansell A, D'Andrea L, Ellisdon AM, et al. Parsing the 
IL-37-Mediated Suppression of Inflammasome Function. Cells 2020. doi: 10.3390/cells9010178.
[204] Li Z, Zhao M, Yang Y, Zou Z, Zhang L, Jiang F, et al. Treatment of a MyD88 inhibitor 
alleviates rejection and inflammation in xenotransplantation by inhibiting dendritic cells activation 
and 
trained 
immunity 
in 
macrophages. 
Int 
Immunopharmacol 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.intimp.2024.111664.
[205] Rother N, Yanginlar C, Lindeboom RGH, Bekkering S, van Leent MMT, Buijsers B, et 
al. Hydroxychloroquine Inhibits the Trained Innate Immune Response to Interferons. Cell Rep Med 
2020. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100146.
[206] Domínguez-Andrés J, Ferreira AV, Jansen T, Smithers N, Prinjha RK, Furze RC, et al. 
Bromodomain inhibitor I-BET151 suppresses immune responses during fungal-immune interaction. 
Eur J Immunol 2019. doi: 10.1002/eji.201848081.
[207] Gao Y, Liu ZZ, Zhang JB, Zhou CK, Zhang JG, Lin XQ, et al. Dihydroartemisinin is an 
inhibitor of trained immunity through Akt/mTOR/HIF1α signaling pathway. Exp Cell Res 2024. doi: 
10.1016/j.yexcr.2024.114052.
[208] Arts RJ, Blok BA, van Crevel R, Joosten LA, Aaby P, Benn CS, et al. Vitamin A induces 
inhibitory histone methylation modifications and down-regulates trained immunity in human 
monocytes. J Leukoc Biol 2015. doi: 10.1189/jlb.6AB0914-416R.
[209] Porbahaie M, Hummel A, Saouadogo H, Coelho RML, Savelkoul HFJ, Teodorowicz M, 
et al. Short-chain fatty acids inhibit the activation of T lymphocytes and myeloid cells and induce 
innate immune tolerance. Benef Microbes 2023. doi: 10.1163/18762891-20220113.
[210] Bulut O, Baydemir I, Kilic G, Domínguez-Andrés J, Netea MG. Resveratrol Potentiates 
BCG-induced 
Trained 
Immunity 
in 
Human 
Monocytes. 
J 
Leukoc 
Biol 
2024. 
doi: 
10.1093/jleuko/qiae241.
[211] Schaltz-Buchholzer F, Kjær Sørensen M, Benn CS, Aaby P. The introduction of BCG 
vaccination to neonates in Northern Sweden, 1927-31: Re-analysis of historical data to understand 
the 
lower 
mortality 
among 
BCG-vaccinated 
children. 
Vaccine 
2022. 
doi: 
10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.06.006.
[212] Shi J, Wu J, Feng G, Yang H, Mu L. Natural Amphibian-Derived Host Defense Peptides: 
Peptide Immunomodulators with Potential Therapeutic Value. Protein Pept Lett 2023. doi: 
10.2174/0929866530666230525163307.
[213] Liang D, Zhang Q, Pang Y, Yan R, Ke Y. SGSM2 in Uveal Melanoma: Implications for 
Survival, 
Immune 
Infiltration, 
and 
Drug 
Sensitivity. 
Protein 
Pept 
Lett 
2024. 
doi: 
10.2174/0109298665341953240926041613.
Highlights:

Trained immunity has garnered increasing attention for its potential to enhance host defense.

The molecular mechanism of trained immunity and its impacts on various diseases are elucidate.

The classification and mechanisms of trained immunity modulators, including vaccines, 
polysaccharides, nanobiologics, endogenous mediators and other non-canonical modulators are 
summarized in a comprehensive and up-to-date perspective.

Insights into future directions for developing novel therapies targeting trained immunity are 
proposed.
 Jiao Chen, Ph.D., is a Research Fellow and master's supervisor at Nanjing 
University of Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). Her primary research focuses on the 
anti-inflammatory and immunopharmacological research of traditional Chinese medicine. She has 
presided over two projects funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China and one 
Jiangsu Provincial Project for the Development of Traditional Chinese Medicine. She has published 
more than 30 peer reviewed papers in journals such as Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B and Cellular 
Communication and Signaling.
 Chenxi Wang is a post-graduate student enrolled at Nanjing University of 
Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). Her research focus is on the anti-tumor immunopharmacology 
of traditional Chinese medicine.
 Shilin Chen is a post-graduate student at Nanjing University of Chinese 
Medicine (Nanjing, China). His research focus is on the anti-tumor and anti-infection 
immunopharmacology of traditional Chinese medicine.
Hui Cai is a post-graduate student from the Third Clinical Medical College 
of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). Her research interest is cancer 
immunotherapy by combing trained immunity and adaptive immunity.
 Mengke Wang is a post-graduate student from the Third Clinical Medical 
College of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). Her research interest is 
anti-tumor immunopharmacology of traditional Chinese medicine.
Jingjie Chang is a post-graduate student from the Third Clinical Medical 
College of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). Her research interest is cancer 
immunotherapy by inducing trained immunity.
 Xueting Cai, Ph.D., is a Research Fellow and master's supervisor at 
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). She has presided over one project of the 
National Major New Drug Creation Program, two projects funded by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China, and one project supported by the Jiangsu Provincial Natural Science 
Foundation. She serves as a member of the Committee on Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Pharmacology of the Jiangsu Pharmacological Society, a member of the Youth Expert Committee of 
the Jiangsu Biotechnology Association, and a member of the Committee on Biotechnology and 
Biopharmaceuticals of Jiangsu Province.
 Jie Yang is an associate Research Fellow and master's supervisor at 
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine (Nanjing, China). Her primary research focuses on 
anti-tumor and anti-inflammatory pharmacology and mechanisms. She has presided over two 
projects funded by the National Natural Science Foundation related to anti-inflammatory and 
immunopharmacology, both of which have been successfully completed. As the first author or 
co-first author, she has published over 10 peer reviewed papers in prestigious immunology journals 
such as Cellular & Molecular Immunology, as well as other internationally influential journals 
including Journal 
of 
Medicinal 
Chemistry, Molecular 
Cancer 
Therapeutics, 
and Cellular 
Communication and Signaling.
 Peng Cao, Ph.D., is a Research Fellow of Nanjing University of Chinese 
Medicine (Nanjing, China). His primary research focuses on the anti-inflammatory and 
immunopharmacological effects and mechanisms of nature products. He has presided over 10 
national-level projects, including the National Key Research and Development Program, the 
National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars, the Key Program of the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China, and the National Major New Drug Creation Project. He has published 
over 150 peer reviewed papers in journals such as Lancet Oncology, Nature Materials, and Cellular 
& Molecular Immunology. He has been honored with the Tu Youyou Award for Innovation in 
Chinese Medicine, the National Health Commission's Outstanding Contribution Award for 
Middle-aged and Young Experts, the Jiangsu Provincial Leading Talent in Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, and the Shulan Medical Youth Award.
Compliance with ethics requirements
Not applicable
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
