Fmoc-DDT@Fos hydrogel mitigates temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis 
through regulating macrophage reprogramming and ferroptosis
Yuxin Zhang a,b,1, Dahe Zhang a,1, Xiaokun Yue b,1, Qingyu Xu a, Lingtong Bu a, Jiajia Lu c,*
,  
Chi Yang a,**
, Pei Shen a,***, Jisi Zheng a,****
a Department of Oral Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, College of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University, National Center for Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Shanghai Research Institute 
of Stomatology, Shanghai, 200011, China
b Shanghai Key Laboratory of Orthopedic Implants, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200011, China
c Department of Orthopedic Trauma, Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, 200434, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis
Fmoc-DDT@Fos hydrogel
Fostamatinib
Macrophage reprogramming
Ferroptosis
Cartilage homeostasis
A B S T R A C T
Temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis (TMJ OA) represents a progressive degenerative disorder that seriously 
threatens patients’ quality of life. Current treatment aims to slow cartilage degeneration, relieve pain, promote 
bone remodeling, and restore joint function. In this study, we develop a novel peptide hydrogel drug delivery 
system named Fmoc-DDT@Fos, combining Fmoc-FF peptides with PLGA/TPP nanospheres loaded with Fosta­
matinib (Fos), functionalized for sustained release and locally targeted application of Fos. In vitro and in vivo 
studies demonstrate that this drug delivery system has good biocompatibility, macrophage targeting, and Fos 
slow-release properties. It is able to inhibit inflammatory response by promoting the functional reprogramming 
of macrophages from pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype toward anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype and modulating 
ferroptosis pathways, which subsequently maintains condylar cartilage homeostasis and halts TMJ OA pro­
gression. By elucidating these mechanisms, our research not only offers a novel therapeutic strategy for TMJ OA 
but also deepens our understanding of its pathophysiology. Moreover, this biomaterial-based strategy may 
provide a safer and more effective framework for managing other inflammatory and degenerative diseases.
1. Introduction
Temporomandibular Joint Osteoarthritis (TMJ OA) represents a 
prevalent chronic degenerative joint disorder, particularly prevalent 
among older adults [1]. Due to the potential harmful effects on cra­
niomaxillofacial growth and development in children and adolescents in 
recent years has received increasing attention from the medical and 
patient communities. TMJ OA is characterized by progressive cartilage 
degeneration, synovitis, and subchondral bone destruction, often lead­
ing to worsening pain, restricted mouth opening, and impaired joint 
mobility, which significantly reduced the patients’ quality of life [2,3]. 
Although its precise pathogenesis remains unclear, TMJ OA is likely 
linked to genetic, metabolic, mechanical stress, and inflammatory 
processes [4]. Given its complexity and multifactorial nature, effective 
management demands comprehensive strategies aimed at symptom re­
lief, slowing disease progression, and damaged tissue repair [5].
Currently, the clinical management of TMJ OA is based on the 
principle of preferred non-surgical treatment, primarily relies on phar­
macological treatments, physical therapy, and behavioral management 
[6,7]. Commonly used medications include non-steroidal anti-in­
flammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids, and glucosamine sulfate 
[8]. While these treatments alleviate pain and inflammation to a certain 
extent, their long-term use can lead to serious side effects, such as 
gastrointestinal issues and cardiovascular risks, and it can also lead to 
drug dependence [9–11]. Physical therapy and behavioral management 
can improve quality of life but generally have limited effects on 
* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author
*** Corresponding author.
**** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: lujiajia@smmu.edu.cn (J. Lu), yangchi1963@hotmail.com (C. Yang), shenpei1215@163.com (P. Shen), 237111641@qq.com (J. Zheng). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today Bio
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2026.102906
Received 15 June 2025; Received in revised form 13 January 2026; Accepted 5 February 2026  
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
Available online 9 February 2026 
2590-0064/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
reversing the degenerative process of the joints [12]. Therefore, the 
development of safer and more effective treatment strategies is urgent 
and imperative [13–15].
In recent years, the application of biomaterials in medicine has 
developed rapidly and has become an important means of disease 
treatment and tissue engineering [16–18]. Among these, peptide 
hydrogels have attracted attention for their biocompatibility, structural 
tunability, and biodegradability [19,20]. Peptide hydrogels offer an 
effective 
drug 
delivery 
platform, 
enabling 
local 
release 
of 
anti-inflammatory or regenerative agents at the lesion site to minimize 
systemic toxicity. Our previous study has identified the potential of the 
targeted drug Fostamatinib (Fos) in the prevention and treatment of 
TMJ OA and initially explored its therapeutic mechanisms [21]. 
Thereby, in this study, we aim to further construct a peptide hydrogel 
drug delivery system for sustained release and locally targeted appli­
cation of Fos, thus demonstrating the potential of biomaterials to opti­
mize therapeutic efficacy through precise drug delivery control [22–24].
Macrophages are highly multifunctional immune cells that play a 
crucial inflammatory regulatory role in the pathogenesis of TMJ OA, 
their polarization state is essential for maintaining or disrupting 
condylar cartilage homeostasis. Pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages 
aggravate synovial inflammation and tissue destruction by secreting 
mediators such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6, whereas M2 macrophages 
produce anti-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-10 and TGF-β, 
facilitating tissue repair [25,26]. Modulating macrophage polarization 
toward the M2 phenotype has emerged as a potential therapeutic 
strategy for TMJ OA. The development of the peptide hydrogel drug 
delivery system is inspired by this principle. It may significantly improve 
the inflammatory state and joint function in TMJ OA by enhancing 
inflammation control and cartilage repair through local modulation of 
macrophage function [27–29].
In this study, we successfully construct the Fmoc-DDT@Fos peptide 
hydrogel drug delivery system and delve into the effect and molecular 
mechanisms by which it alleviates TMJ OA through the modulation of 
macrophage function. Through comprehensive in vitro and in vivo ex­
periments, we aim to demonstrate that the hydrogel facilitates the 
reprogramming of M1 macrophages to M2 phenotype and inhibits fer­
roptosis. These actions collectively alleviate TMJ OA by reducing joint 
inflammation and maintaining condylar cartilage homeostasis. By 
elucidating these mechanisms, this research not only offers a novel 
therapeutic strategy for TMJ OA but also deepens our understanding of 
its pathophysiology. Moreover, this biomaterial-based strategy may 
provide a safer and more effective framework for managing other in­
flammatory and degenerative diseases.
Fig. 1. Synthesis and characterization of DDT@Fos. (A) Schematic illustration of PPT@Fos synthesis; TEM (B) and SEM (C) analysis of PLGA-b-PEG-TPP and 
PPT@Fos morphology; NTA of size distribution for PLGA-b-PEG-TPP (D) and PPT@Fos (E); (F) NTA of Zeta potential for PLGA-b-PEG-TPP and PPT@Fos; (G) 
Schematic illustration of DDT@Fos synthesis; TEM (H) and SEM (I) analysis of PPT@Fos and DDT@Fos morphology; (J) NTA of size distribution for DDT@Fos; (K) 
NTA of Zeta potential for PLGA-b-PEG-TPP, PPT@Fos, and DDT@Fos; (L) Fluorescence detection of ddH2O, PPT@Fos, DBCO-DS, and DDT@Fos.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
2 
2. Results
2.1. Development of Fos-loaded DDT@Fos
Spleen Tyrosine Kinase (SYK) inhibitors can block M1 macrophage 
polarization and limit pro-inflammatory cytokine release, thereby 
ameliorating osteoarthritis [30,31]. Fos, the first SYK inhibitor approved 
for clinical use, reduces the inflammatory response by inhibiting SYK 
activation in macrophages [32,33]. However, its exact therapeutic role 
and mechanism for TMJ OA as well as how to develop safer, more 
effective, and more precise and long-lasting modes of administration 
remain to be further investigated. In this study, we have designed and 
synthesized a peptide hydrogel incorporating poly(lactic-co-glycolic 
acid)/tripolyphosphate (PLGA/TPP) nanospheres for the delivery of 
Fos. This drug delivery system is engineered to specifically target mac­
rophages, thereby modulating the inflammatory microenvironment of 
TMJ OA (Fig. S1).
Initially, we synthesized PLGA/TPP by coupling PLGA-b-PEG-OH 
with TPP (Fig. 1A). As shown in Fig. S2A, the coupling of PLGA-b- 
PEG-OH with TPP facilitated the self-assembly of nanospheres. 
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) revealed a carbonyl 
peak shift, confirming the interaction between PLGA-b-PEG-OH and TPP 
(Fig. S2B). Furthermore, the correlation of the PPh3+ peaks within the 
7.70-7.90 range with the TPP 1H NMR spectra further verified the 
conjugation between TPP and PLGA-b-PEG (Fig. S2C–E). Fos was sub­
sequently encapsulated using the inherent self-assembly capability of 
PLGA-b-PEG-TPP, named PPT@Fos. Transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) demonstrated that PPT@Fos retained a three-dimensional 
spherical architecture and possessed a greater diameter than PLGA-b- 
PEG-TPP (Fig. 1B). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) further 
confirmed that the nanospheres were spherical and their size increased 
after loading with Fos (Fig. 1C). Particle size analysis was further vali­
dated by nanosizer measurements, which showed that the average 
diameter of PLGA-b-PEG-TPP was 83.59 ± 9.6 nm with a zeta potential 
of −11.26 mV, whereas PPT@Fos had an average diameter of 
158.13 ± 16.3 nm and a zeta potential of −8.76 mV. Both size 
enlargement and a modest rise in zeta potential were observed after drug 
incorporation (Fig. 1D–F).
We then conjugated dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO) with cy5.5 fluo­
rescent dye-labeled dextran sulfate (DS), a targeting fragment for scav­
enger receptor class A (SR-A) expressed on macrophages, yielding the 
compound DBCO-DS (Fig. 1G, Fig. S3A). The fluorescence of DBCO-DS 
under near-infrared light confirmed the successful conjugation of 
cy5.5-DS with DBCO-amine (Fig. S3B), which was further substantiated 
by ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (Fig. S3C). Additionally, the corre­
lation of the 1H NMR spectra further indicated the presence of charac­
teristic DS hydroxyl (-OH) peaks in the synthesized DBCO-DS 
(Fig. S3D–F). Subsequently, we introduced azide groups on the surface 
of PPT@Fos and used click chemistry to attach DBCO-DS to the azide- 
containing PPT@Fos, thereby generating the targeted macrophage 
nanospheres DDT@Fos (Fig. 1G). TEM and SEM showed that DDT@Fos 
maintained a spherical morphology, uniform distribution, and intact 
structure (Fig. 1H and I). Compared to PPT@Fos, the DDT@Fos 
exhibited a slight increase in size, averaging 217.37 ± 18.3 nm, and a 
slightly higher zeta potential of −2.89 mV (Fig. 1J and K). Near-infrared 
illumination further verified the successful combination of PPT@Fos 
with DBCO-DS (Fig. 1L). These results demonstrate the successful con­
struction of Fos-loaded DDT@Fos nanospheres.
2.2. Development of DDT@Fos-loaded Fmoc-DDT@Fos
Peptide hydrogels, resembling the secondary structures of natural 
proteins, exhibit excellent biocompatibility, hydrophilicity, and pro­
cessability, making them widely applicable as therapeutic agents and 
drug 
delivery 
carriers 
[34,35]. 
Among 
of 
them, 
fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl-diphenylalanine 
(Fmoc-FF) 
peptide 
hydrogels are widely utilized in biomedical contexts, including drug 
delivery, tissue engineering, wound repair, and biosensing, owing to its 
self-assembly capability, adjustable mechanical strength, high water 
retention, injectability, and favorable biocompatibility [36,37]. There­
fore, we further synthesized the DDT@Fos loaded Fmoc-FF named 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos to enhance the delivery efficiency of the nanospheres 
(Fig. 2A).
The attachment of DDT@Fos on the Fmoc-FF is illustrated in Fig. 2B. 
TEM, SEM, and near-infrared light detection further verified the suc­
cessful adhesion of DDT@Fos within Fmoc-FF (Fig. 2C–E). As illustrated 
in Fig. 2F, elevating the nanospheres content in the hydrogel resulted in 
corresponding rises in both the storage modulus (G′) and the loss 
modulus (G″), reflecting enhanced mechanical strength of the hydrogel. 
This effect is likely due to the nanospheres introducing multiple points of 
contact within the fibers of the Fmoc-FF, thereby increasing its me­
chanical strength. Additionally, Fmoc-DDT@Fos demonstrated self- 
healing capabilities, with the ability to rapidly recover from breaks 
through at least three cycles of damage and repair (Fig. 2G). Further­
more, in vitro drug release tests showed that Fmoc-DDT@Fos provided 
sustained Fos release in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Fig. 2H).
To further evaluate the biosafety of Fmoc-DDT@Fos, the rat condylar 
chondrocytes were isolated and cultured (Fig. S4A–B). As shown in 
Fig. S4C, the chondrocytes displayed typical spindle-shaped and 
polygonal morphologies. Fig. S4D depicted chondrocytes stained with 
Toluidine Blue, displaying a blue matrix and dark blue nuclei. The 
presence of sparse metachromatic granules around the cells indicates the 
secretion of proteoglycans by the chondrocytes. Immunofluorescence 
(IF) staining further revealed high expression of Collagen II, which is the 
marker for chondrocytes (Fig. S4E). Subsequently, synovial macro­
phages were obtained from rat TMJ synovium and exhibited high 
expression of macrophage markers CD45 and CD11b (Fig. S5A–C). IFN- 
γ/LPS treatment successfully induced the M0 macrophages to M1 
phenotype, as evidenced by elevated expression of iNOS and CD86 
(Fig. S5D).
Subsequently, IF staining was employed to evaluate the uptake of 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos by synovial macrophages. Cells co-cultured with Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos displayed red fluorescence, indicating that the macrophages 
internalized the nanospheres (Fig. S6A). The biocompatibility of Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos was further evaluated using live/dead cell staining 
(Fig. S6B–C) and Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) cell viability assays 
(Fig. S6D–E), which revealed negligible cytotoxicity to both chon­
drocytes and synovial macrophages. Additionally, hemolysis assays also 
indicated that the excellent biocompatibility of Fmoc-DDT@Fos in the 
circulatory system (Fig. S6F). In vivo experiments were also performed to 
test the degradation of Fmoc-DDT@Fos within the body. Over time, the 
fluorescence intensity of Fmoc-DDT@Fos gradually decreased in the rat 
TMJs, indicating that the material could be progressively degraded and 
absorbed (Fig. S6G). Histological examination of the heart, lungs, liver, 
spleen, and kidneys via hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed 
no pathological abnormalities (Fig. S6H). Collectively, these results 
confirm that Fmoc-DDT@Fos is successfully developed and exhibited 
favorable Fos slow release, macrophage targeting, and biocompatibility.
2.3. Fmoc-DDT@Fos induces macrophage reprogramming to mitigate 
inflammation
To investigate the impact of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on macrophage 
reprogramming, IFN-γ/LPS were used to induce M0 macrophages to M1 
phenotype, followed by Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment. IF staining and 
Western blot (WB) revealed that M1 macrophages exhibited signifi­
cantly higher SYK expression compared to M0 macrophages, which was 
notably reduced after Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment (Fig. 3A and B). 
Additionally, Fmoc-DDT@Fos exposure decreased CD86 (M1 marker) 
expression while increasing CD206 (M2 marker) expression, suggesting 
macrophage reprogramming from the M1 to the M2 phenotype 
(Fig. 3C). The underlying mechanism is depicted in Fig. 3D and these 
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
3 
findings were further validated by flow cytometry (Fig. 3E, Fig. S7). 
Finally, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and WB were 
performed to quantify the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
(TNF-α, IL-6) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (TGF-β, IL-10). 
Compared to M0 macrophages, M1 macrophages displayed markedly 
elevated TNF-α and IL-6 levels, accompanied by a reduction in TGF-β 
and IL-10 production. Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment significantly reversed 
these changes (Fig. 3F and G), indicating that Fmoc-DDT@Fos effec­
tively suppresses the inflammation triggered by M1 macrophages. 
Collectively, these results demonstrate that Fmoc-DDT@Fos facilitates 
the macrophage reprogramming, thereby mitigating the inflammatory 
response associated with M1 macrophages.
2.4. Fmoc-DDT@Fos maintains condylar cartilage homeostasis by 
modulating macrophage reprogramming
Considering the complex interactions between macrophages and 
chondrocytes during the progression of TMJ OA, we further investigated 
whether Fmoc-DDT@Fos could influence condylar chondrocyte func­
tion (proliferation, migration, apoptosis, and matrix degradation) by 
modulating macrophage reprogramming. Firstly, we added conditioned 
media (CM) from differently treated macrophages to chondrocyte cul­
tures and assessed cell viability and proliferation capacity using CCK-8 
and EdU staining. M1 macrophage CM markedly reduced chondrocyte 
viability and proliferative capacity, whereas Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment 
restored both parameters (Fig. 4A and B). WB analysis further demon­
strated that Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment significantly reversed the M1 
macrophage CM-induced reduction in proliferation markers Ki67 and 
PCNA expression (Fig. 4C). Additionally, we evaluated the chondrocytes 
Fig. 2. Synthesis and characterization of Fmoc-DDT@Fos. (A) Schematic illustration of Fmoc-DDT@Fos synthesis; (B) Distribution diagram of DDT@Fos in Fmoc- 
FF hydrogel; TEM (C) and SEM (D) analysis of Fmoc-FF and Fmoc-DDT@Fos morphology; (E) Fluorescence detection of ddH2O, Fmoc-FF, DDT@Fos, and Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos; (F) Rheological characterization of Fmoc-DDT@Fos loaded with varying concentrations of DDT@Fos; (G) Rheological evaluation of the self-healing 
properties of Fmoc-DDT@Fos; (H) Release of Fos from Fmoc-DDT@Fos into PBS over 72 h.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
4 
migration capacity through wound healing and Transwell assays. 
Chondrocytes incubated with M1 macrophage CM exhibited reduced 
cell migration, which was significantly enhanced by Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
treatment (Fig. 4D and E). Subsequently, we investigated the effect of 
macrophage reprogramming on chondrocyte apoptosis. The results 
indicated that chondrocyte apoptosis was significantly increased when 
cultured in M1 macrophage CM, which was reduced by Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
treatment (Fig. 4F). Similarly, M1 macrophage CM upregulated the 
expression of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax and downregulated the anti- 
apoptotic protein Bcl-2 in chondrocytes, and Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment 
reversed this expression alteration (Fig. 4G). Finally, we examined 
extracellular matrix (ECM) metabolism in chondrocytes. M1 macro­
phage CM treatment significantly increased the expression of the cata­
bolic marker Adamts5 while reducing the anabolic markers Aggrecan 
(AGG) and Collagen II. Fmoc-DDT@Fos intervention dramatically 
reversed this alteration, suggesting that enhanced cartilage matrix 
synthesis (Fig. 4H). Collectively, these results demonstrate that Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos can protect chondrocyte function by regulating macrophage 
Fig. 3. Fmoc-DDT@Fos promotes macrophage reprogramming. IF (A) and WB (B) analysis of SYK expression in synovial macrophages; (C) IF staining of CD86 
and CD206 in synovial macrophages; (D) Schematic of the Fmoc-DDT@Fos action mechanism; (E) Flow cytometry analysis of CD86 and CD206 expression in synovial 
macrophages; ELISA (F) and WB (G) analysis of TNF-α, IL-6, TGF-β, and IL-10 expression in synovial macrophages. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p <
0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
5 
reprogramming, thus maintaining condylar cartilage homeostasis.
2.5. Multi-omics sequencing analysis to explore the mechanism of Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos promoting macrophage reprogramming
To further investigate the mechanism of Fmoc-DDT@Fos promoting 
macrophage reprogramming, we conducted bulk RNA-seq analysis on 
M1 macrophages treated with PBS (control group) or Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
(treatment group). Principal component analysis (PCA) demonstrated 
a pronounced segregation of the two groups, reflecting markedly 
different transcriptional landscapes (Fig. S8A). After normalizing the 
RNA-seq data (Fig. S8B–C), 466 differential expression genes (DEGs) 
meeting the thresholds of |log2FC| > 2 and p < 0.05 were identified, 
including 216 with increased expression and 250 with decreased 
expression (Fig. S8D–E). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis 
revealed that DEGs were predominantly concentrated in biological 
processes (BP) such as cytokine-mediated signaling, leukocyte migra­
tion, and lymphocyte proliferation; cellular components (CC) including 
receptor complexes, secretory granules, and collagen-rich extracellular 
matrices; and molecular functions (MF) related to cytokine receptor 
binding, cytokine activity, and G protein-coupled receptor binding 
(Fig. 5A and B). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 
pathway analysis demonstrated that DEGs were most prominently 
associated with cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and ferroptosis 
pathways (Fig. 5C and D).
Molecules expression analysis related to the cytokine-cytokine 
receptor interaction pathway revealed that pro-inflammatory pathways 
such as IL-6, IL-1, and TNF were significantly suppressed, while anti- 
inflammatory pathways such as IL-10 were activated in the treatment 
group (Fig. S9). Additionally, ferroptosis-associated molecules were 
markedly downregulated in the treatment group, indicating significant 
suppression of this pathway (Fig. S10). RNA-seq analysis of 
inflammation-related genes showed significantly lower of pro- 
inflammatory Il6, Il1b, and Tnf, accompanied by increased Il10 and 
Tgfb1 relative to the control group (Fig. 5E–Table S1). Expression of M1 
macrophage markers Cd86 and Cd80 was reduced, whereas M2 markers 
Cd206 and Cd163 were elevated, consistent with in vitro results and 
further confirming macrophage reprogramming induced by Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos (Fig. 5F–Table S1).
Finally, proteomic sequencing further supported these findings. PCA 
and Loading plots clearly separated the control and treatment groups 
(Fig. S11A–C). Orthogonal Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis 
(OPLS-DA) revealed clear group separation, and permutation testing 
produced an R2Y value of 0.998 (>0.8), confirming the robustness of the 
model (Fig. S11D–E). Normalized proteomic data identified 46 differ­
entially expressed proteins (DEPs; |log2FC| > 1, p < 0.05), comprising 
21 upregulated and 25 downregulated proteins in the treatment group 
(Fig. S11F). GO analyses indicated that the DEPs were predominantly 
clustered in pathways associated with cellular biotic stimulus, endocytic 
vesicle, and cytokine receptor binding (Fig. S12A–B). Consistent with 
RNA-seq, KEGG enrichment further reinforced the regulatory role of 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
in 
cytokine-cytokine 
receptor 
interaction 
and 
Fig. 4. Effects of Fmoc-DDT@Fos-induced macrophage reprogramming on chondrocytes. (A) CCK-8 assay of chondrocytes at 12, 24, 36, and 48 h; (B) EdU 
assay evaluating proliferation capacity of chondrocytes; (C) WB analysis of Ki67 and PCNA expression in chondrocytes; (D) Scratch assay of chondrocytes; (E) 
Transwell assay of chondrocytes; (F) AnnexinV/PI dual staining flow cytometry assessing chondrocyte apoptosis; (G) WB analysis of Bax and Bcl-2 expression in 
chondrocytes; (H) WB analysis of Adamts5, AGG, and Collagen II expression in chondrocytes. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
6 
ferroptosis (Fig. S12C–D). Key protein expression analysis revealed that 
SYK and pro-inflammatory factors (TNF and IL-1β) were decreased, 
while the anti-inflammatory factor TGF-β1 was increased. Additionally, 
CD80 expression decreased, whereas CD206 expression increased 
(Fig. S13, Table S2). These findings are consistent with RNA-seq and in 
vitro results. Overall, these results confirm that Fmoc-DDT@Fos-induced 
M1-to-M2 macrophage reprogramming is closely related to the regula­
tion of inflammation and ferroptosis pathways.
2.6. Fmoc-DDT@Fos inhibits macrophage ferroptosis
To further investigate the moderator effect of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on 
ferroptosis, we treated synovial macrophages with the ferroptosis in­
ducers Erastin and Fmoc-DDT@Fos to assess their biological functions. 
Initially, we measured specific markers associated with ferroptosis: iron 
content, reduced glutathione (GSH), oxidized glutathione (GSSG), 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and malondialdehyde (MDA) [38]. 
FerroOrange probe and iron detection kit results showed that 
Erastin-induced a significant increase in Fe2+ and total iron levels, 
which was reversed by Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment, suggesting its ability 
to maintain iron homeostasis (Fig. 6A and B). Redox balance assessment 
showed a pronounced decline in the GSH/GSSG ratio after Erastin 
exposure, whereas Fmoc-DDT@Fos restored this ratio (Fig. 6C). 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment similarly inhibited the Erastin-induced in­
crease in ROS (Fig. 6D and E). Intracellular ROS can oxidize membrane 
polyunsaturated lipids, forming MDA and other end products [39]. 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment also significantly inhibited Erastin-induced 
elevation of MDA (Fig. 6F). Similarly, elevated lipid peroxidation 
levels detected by the lipid peroxidation sensor C11-BODIPY581/591 
were also alleviated by Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment (Fig. 6G). These re­
sults indicate an alleviation of oxidative stress state of macrophages by 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos.
To further verify these findings, the expression of GPX4 and 
SLC7A11, key ferroptosis inhibitors with antioxidative repair functions, 
Fig. 5. Pathway enrichment analysis of macrophage RNA-seq data. Bubble chart (A) and circular diagram (B) for GO enrichment analysis of DEGs from RNA-seq; 
Bubble chart (C) and circular diagram (D) for KEGG enrichment analysis of DEGs from RNA-seq; (E) Expression levels of Il6, Il1b, Tnf, Il10, and Tgfb1 genes in RNA- 
seq data; (F) Expression levels of Cd86, Cd80, Cd206, and Cd163 genes in RNA-seq data. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
7 
was 
quantified 
[40,41]. 
Consistent 
with 
RNA-seq 
results, 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos significantly reversed Erastin-induced reduction of 
Gpx4 and Slc7a11 at the transcriptional level (Fig. 6H and I). Ferroptosis 
is also associated with characteristic mitochondrial morphological 
changes [42,43]. As shown in Fig. 6J, mitochondrial shrinkage, cristae 
reduction, and increased membrane density were observed in macro­
phages treated with Erastin, while mitochondrial damage appeared to be 
repaired after Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment. JC-1 staining, which assesses 
changes in mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), showed that 
Erastin significantly decreased the MMP hyperpolarization, while 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos attenuated this effect (Fig. 6K), suggesting that 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos modulates macrophage ferroptosis potentially through 
its effects on mitochondrial function. Collectively, these results confirm 
that Fmoc-DDT@Fos has an important role in inhibiting macrophage 
ferroptosis.
2.7. Fmoc-DDT@Fos promotes tissue repair in TMJ OA Rat
To investigate the effects of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on tissue repair, we 
established a TMJ OA rat model by intra-articular injection of mono­
sodium iodoacetate (MIA) and treated with or without Fmoc-DDT@Fos. 
Micro-CT analysis revealed localized bone surface collapse, subchondral 
bone degeneration, and increased marrow space after MIA injection, 
while Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment significantly alleviated subchondral 
Fig. 6. Impact of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on macrophage ferroptosis. (A) Fe2+ in macrophages was marked using FerroOrange; (B) Total iron content in macrophages 
was measured by iron assay kit; (C) GSH/GSSG ratio in macrophages; (D-E) Visualization of ROS production in macrophages using DCFH-DA; (F) Measurement of 
MDA content in macrophages; (G) C11-BODIPY 581/591 staining for macrophages; qRT-PCR analysis of ferroptosis-related gene Gpx4 (H) and Slc7a11 (I); (J) TEM 
observation of mitochondrial morphology; (K) JC-1 assay for MMP in macrophages. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
8 
bone destruction and improved cortical surface smoothness (Fig. 7A). 
Quantitative analysis showed that the reduced bone volume fraction 
(BV/TV) and increased trabecular separation (Tb.Sp) were reversed 
following Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment (Fig. 7B and C). H&E staining 
indicated that TMJ OA rats exhibited severe inflammatory cell infiltra­
tion, extensive synovitis, abscess formation, cartilage destruction, and 
bone erosion. In contrast, the Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment markedly 
alleviate these pathological changes (Fig. 7D–G). Safranin O-fast green 
staining revealed a marked loss of aggrecan (AGG) deposition and 
significantly elevated Osteoarthritis Research Society International 
(OARSI) scores in TMJ OA rats, which was improved by Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
(Fig. 7H–J). Additionally, immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed 
that Fmoc-DDT@Fos significantly restored the TMJ OA-induced 
decrease in chondrocyte marker Col2α (Fig. 7K), indicating chon­
drocyte number increase, consistent with in vitro findings. Finally, the in 
vivo biosafety of Fmoc-DDT@Fos was assessed. Histological examination 
of heart, liver, spleen, lung, and kidney tissues showed no apparent 
damage in any group (Fig. S14A). Serum biochemical analysis revealed 
no significant differences in liver (ALT, AST), heart (LDH, CK), and 
kidney (UREA, CREA) function markers (Fig. S14B–D). Collectively, 
these results demonstrate that Fmoc-DDT@Fos effectively mitigates the 
pathological changes of TMJ OA and slowing down disease progression.
2.8. Fmoc-DDT@Fos promotes macrophage reprogramming in TMJ OA 
Rat
To further elucidate the impact of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on macrophage 
reprogramming in vivo, we conducted follow-up studies on TMJ OA rats. 
Initially, IHC staining revealed markedly elevated SYK expression in 
TMJ OA rats, which was reduced following Fmoc-DDT@Fos adminis­
tration (Fig. 8A). Next, we examined the expression of the pan- 
macrophage marker CD45 using IF staining. Notably, Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
did not alter the increased expression of CD45 induced by TMJ OA, 
suggesting the overall number of macrophages remained unchanged 
(Fig. 8B). Interestingly, consistent with the in vitro results, introduction 
of Fmoc-DDT@Fos alters the ratio of CD86 to CD206 and induces 
Fig. 7. Effects of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on tissue repair in TMJ OA rat. (A) Micro-CT scans show sagittal and top views of rat TMJs; Assessment of BV/TV (B) and Tb.Sp 
(C); (D) H&E staining of rat TMJs; Histological scoring of neutrophil infiltration (E), synovitis (F), and cartilage erosion (G) in rat TMJs; (H) Safranin O-fast green 
staining of rat TMJs; (I) AGG content in rat TMJs; (J) OARSI scoring of rat TMJs; (K) IHC staining of Col2α in rat TMJs. ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
9 
macrophage reprogramming from pro-inflammatory M1 to anti- 
inflammatory M2 phenotype (Fig. 8C). Flow cytometry further vali­
dated these findings (Fig. 8D, Fig. S15). Lastly, WB was used to assess 
key inflammatory factor expression. TMJ OA rats exhibited significantly 
increased expression of TNF-α and IL-6, while TGF-β and IL-10 were 
downregulated. Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment effectively reversed these 
changes (Fig. 8E). Collectively, these data indicate that Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
can modulate the inflammatory microenvironment in TMJ OA rats by 
promoting macrophage reprogramming.
2.9. Fmoc-DDT@Fos inhibits ferroptosis in TMJ OA Rat
Finally, we also investigated the impact of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on fer­
roptosis in TMJ OA rats. Prussian blue staining revealed elevated Fe3+
deposition in TMJ OA rats, which was markedly reduced following 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos treatment (Fig. S16A). In addition, Fmoc-DDT@Fos 
significantly reduced the TMJ OA-induced increase in ROS content 
(Fig. S16B). IF staining (Fig. S16C–D) and qRT-PCR analysis (Fig. S16E) 
of ferroptosis-related molecule showed that the ferroptosis inhibitory 
molecules GPX4 and SLC7A11 was significantly downregulated in TMJ 
OA rats, whereas the ferroptosis-inducing molecule acyl-CoA synthetase 
long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4) was significantly increased. 
Notably, Fmoc-DDT@Fos effectively reversed these changes. Abnormal 
alterations in ferroptosis-revealed markers MDA and GSH/GSSG ratio in 
TMJ OA rats were also significantly restored by the introduction of 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos (Fig. S16F–G). Furthermore, TEM showed that Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos 
treatment 
alleviated 
typical 
ferroptosis-revealed 
mitochondrial abnormalities in TMJ OA rats, such as cristae disruption 
and compromised membrane integrity (Fig. S16H). Collectively, these 
results suggest that Fmoc-DDT@Fos can inhibit ferroptosis in TMJ OA 
rats.
3. Discussion
TMJ OA is a prevalent chronic degenerative joint disease that 
significantly impairs joint function and diminishes the patients’ quality 
of life [44]. It is characterized by cartilage degeneration, inflammatory 
response, and subchondral bone destruction, often accompanied by pain 
and limited mobility. Importantly, while traditionally associated with 
aging, its incidence is rising among middle-aged and younger in­
dividuals. Current interventions primarily relieve symptoms but fail to 
halt or reverse joint degeneration [45–47]. Therefore, the search for new 
multidimensional therapeutic strategies for TMJ OA continues to be a 
current hot topic.
Considering that our recent research has made a groundbreaking 
discovery that Fos can alleviates TMJ OA by maintaining cartilage ho­
meostasis [21], here we introduces an innovative treatment approach of 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos peptide hydrogel drug delivery system for locally tar­
geted long-term administration of Fos, and then explores its therapeutic 
potential in TMJ OA. Our strategy offers a more targeted therapy with 
potentially fewer side effects than traditional treatments. A combination 
of in vitro and in vivo investigations demonstrated that the hydrogel 
markedly ameliorates TMJ OA-induced pathological alterations, 
underscoring its potential in drug delivery applications. These findings 
Fig. 8. Impact of Fmoc-DDT@Fos on macrophage reprogramming in TMJ OA rat. (A) IHC staining of SYK in rat TMJs; (B) IF staining of CD45 in rat TMJs; (C) IF 
staining of CD206 and CD86 in rat TMJs; (D) Flow cytometry analysis of CD163, CD206, CD80, and CD86 in rat TMJs; (E) WB analysis of TNF-α, IL-6, TGF-β, and IL- 
10 in rat TMJs. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, “ns” indicates no statistical difference.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
10 
provide new molecular targets and treatment methods for TMJ OA and 
expand peptide hydrogels’ application in the biomedical field. Mean­
while, the hydrogel prepared in this study is an injectable hydrogel, 
which can be administered in a fluid state through a syringe. After in­
jection, the liquid undergoes an in situ sol-gel transition to form a tissue 
engineering scaffold. This type of hydrogel represents a promising 
therapeutic material that can be directly used as a drug carrier or 
encapsulate smaller drug delivery vehicles to achieve precise and 
controlled delivery of drugs or biotherapeutic molecules to the lesion 
site, thereby providing safe and effective treatment. Such hydrogels are 
frequently employed in the treatment of refractory diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [48–51].
Currently, mainstream treatment strategies for TMJ OA rely heavily 
on pharmacological and non-pharmacological approaches [44]. Phar­
macological approaches, including NSAIDs and corticosteroids, can 
relieve pain and inflammation. However, concerns regarding long-term 
efficacy and safety persist, particularly the risks of gastrointestinal 
complications and potential cardiovascular adverse effects [52,53]. 
Non-pharmacological treatments such as physical therapy and behav­
ioral modifications offer partial symptom relief but fail to halt or reverse 
joint degeneration. In contrast, the Fmoc-DDT@Fos developed in this 
study exhibits excellent biocompatibility and achieves controlled release 
and targeted delivery of Fos through PLGA/TPP incorporation, enabling 
precise control of drug concentration and spatiotemporal release, which 
significantly reduces the risk of systemic side effects and enhances both 
therapeutic efficacy and safety. This hydrogel can effectively suppress 
inflammation and promote tissue repair by the regulation of macro­
phage reprogramming and ferroptosis, which remain challenging for 
conventional treatments and show notable innovation and practical 
potential. Compared with conventional drug delivery systems, this 
platform exhibits distinct advantages in managing inflammatory disor­
ders, particularly arthritis [54].
Macrophages play a critical dual role in inflammatory diseases like 
TMJ OA [55–57]. These versatile immune cells can polarize into 
pro-inflammatory M1 and anti-inflammatory M2 phenotypes, exerting 
opposing effects on inflammation and tissue repair [58–60]. In our 
study, the Fmoc-DDT@Fos effectively promoted the reprogramming of 
macrophages from M1 to M2 phenotype, significantly reducing M1 
macrophage-initiated inflammatory response. Under inflammatory 
conditions, macrophages are distributed not only in the synovium but 
also in the subchondral marrow cavity and peri-cartilaginous tissues. 
Considering the widespread distribution of macrophages in the TMJ and 
the targeted design of the DDT structure, Fmoc-DDT@Fos is also likely 
to act on macrophages beyond the synovium. This finding provides a 
new mechanistic understanding of TMJ OA treatment and highlights the 
potential importance of regulating macrophage polarization in treating 
inflammatory diseases. Compared with previous studies, our approach 
offers a deeper exploration of molecular strategies for macrophage 
functional regulation, presenting a more fundamental and durable 
alternative to conventional anti-inflammatory drugs and opening 
promising avenues for future research and therapy.
Ferroptosis, a regulated cell death modality driven by iron, has 
recently been recognized as a pivotal contributor to various pathological 
conditions, particularly those associated with oxidative stress [61–63]. 
In chronic inflammatory conditions such as TMJ OA, ferroptosis directly 
influences the inflammatory process and tissue repair mechanisms by 
modulating the activity and survival of macrophages [64]. In this study, 
we demonstrated that the Fmoc-DDT@Fos how controlling the homeo­
stasis of intracellular iron can effectively regulate the ferroptosis 
pathway, thereby suppressing inflammatory response. This precise 
regulation of iron homeostasis provides a novel perspective for TMJ OA 
treatment and offers potential therapeutic strategies for other diseases 
involving dysregulated iron metabolism.
Although this study presents a novel therapeutic approach and mo­
lecular insights for TMJ OA repair, several limitations should be 
acknowledged. Firstly, the therapeutic efficacy of Fmoc-DDT@Fos was 
evaluated only in a TMJ OA rat model, validation in additional animal 
models is required to further confirm its feasibility and effectiveness. 
Secondly, the investigation primarily focused on regulating ferroptosis 
and inflammatory pathways, whereas Fmoc-DDT@Fos may also influ­
ence other signaling cascades and molecular mechanisms. Future 
research should explore these potential pathways and identify syner­
gistic effects. Additionally, while transcriptomic and proteomic analyses 
strongly implicate the SYK pathway, direct experimental evidence is 
lacking. Studies employing SYK gene knockout or selective inhibitors are 
warranted to substantiate this mechanistic link. Other limitations 
include the restricted sample size, potential model bias, and controlled 
experimental settings. Increasing sample size and performing long-term 
follow-up will be essential to verify therapeutic durability and safety. 
Furthermore, ferroptosis detection was conducted using whole TMJ 
tissue rather than isolated synovial tissue, which should be addressed in 
future experiments for improved specificity. Finally, standard thera­
peutic controls, such as NSAIDs or corticosteroids, were not included, 
preventing direct comparison of efficacy and safety. Subsequent work 
should incorporate such controls and optimize the hydrogel formulation 
by enhancing stability and drug-loading efficiency.
In summary, the Fmoc-DDT@Fos peptide hydrogel drug delivery 
system developed in this study has good biocompatibility, macrophage 
targeting, and Fos slow-release properties. Through a series of in vitro 
and in vivo experiments, we have demonstrated that this hydrogel 
significantly ameliorates pathological changes in TMJ OA by modu­
lating macrophage reprogramming and ferroptosis, followed by inhib­
iting inflammatory response and maintaining cartilage homeostasis. 
(Fig. 9). Our study provides novel molecular targets and therapeutic 
strategies for the clinical management of TMJ OA and highlights the 
promise of peptide hydrogel as drug delivery system in the biomedical 
field, providing valuable insights and transforming clinical applications 
for the future treatment of similar chronic inflammatory and degener­
ative diseases.
4. Materials and methods
4.1. Morphology, size, and distribution of nanospheres
TEM: nanospheres (20 μL) were placed on carbon-coated copper 
grids, negatively stained with 1% uranyl acetate (CD106833, Howei­
pharm, China) for 5 min, rinsed three times with PBS, and air-dried after 
removing residual phosphotungstic acid with filter paper. Images were 
obtained at 100 kV utilizing a Hitachi H7650 TEM (Hitachi, Japan).
SEM: nanospheres were mounted on conductive tape, sputter-coated 
with gold for 60 s using a Cressington device (Cressington Scientific 
Instruments, UK), and imaged at 3 kV with an S-4800 SEM (Hitachi, 
Japan).
Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA): 20 μg nanospheres were dis­
solved in 1 mL PBS, vortexing for 1 min, and analyzing size distribution 
with a ZetaView system (Particle Metrix, Germany). Dynamic light 
scattering (DLS) was performed to determine the average particle size, 
polydispersity index (PDI), and zeta potential.
4.2. Rheological assessment
Rheological properties were evaluated at 25 ◦C utilizing an Anton 
Paar MCR 502e rheometer (Anton Paar, Austria) with plate-plate ge­
ometry and a saturated chamber to prevent evaporation. Hydrogel 
samples containing varying nanosphere concentrations (0-0.5% w/v) 
were transferred directly from the mixing tube to the measurement 
plate. Self-healing ability was determined by cyclic strain testing, 
alternating between 1% and 500% strain for three consecutive cycles.
4.3. Drug release efficiency testing
In vitro drug release testing: Samples were suspended in PBS and 
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
11 
periodically collected, filtered to remove the hydrogel and nanospheres, 
and the supernatant was obtained. A Fos stock solution (1 mg/mL in 
acetonitrile) was serially diluted to generate an eight-point calibration 
curve (1-0.005 mg/mL). The filtered supernatant sample was injected 
into the High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC, Agilent, 
USA) system, retention times and peak areas were recorded for each 
sample. The concentration of Fos was determined using the calibration 
curve.
In vivo dissolution testing: The Fmoc-DDT@Fos (0.5 mg in 50 μL PBS) 
was injected into rat TMJs. To monitor the dissolution of the hydrogel 
over time, in vivo imaging was performed on days 1, 3, 5, and 7 post- 
injection using an IVIS Lumina Series imaging system (PerkinElmer, 
USA). Injections of an equivalent dose of cy5.5-DS served as controls.
4.4. Culture of condylar chondrocytes
Condylar cartilage was obtained from Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats 
(Shanghai SIPPR-Bk Lab Animal Co., Ltd., China) under sterile condi­
tions, rinsed with PBS, cut into pieces, and digested with 0.2% type II 
collagenase (17101015, Thermo Fisher, USA) and 0.25% trypsin 
(25200072, Thermo Fisher) at 37 ◦C for 3 h. The resulting cell suspen­
sion was filtered through a stainless steel mesh and centrifuged for 
5 min. The cells were subsequently transferred to Dulbecco's Modified 
Eagle Medium (DMEM, 11965092, Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, 10099, Gibco, USA) and 100 U/mL 
penicillin-streptomycin solution (10378016, Thermo Fisher) and incu­
bated with 5% CO2 at 37 ◦C. The medium was replaced every 2 days. 
When the confluence of cells reached about 90%, the cells were 
passaged, and the chondrocytes used in this study were from the pas­
sages 3-6. The identification of condyle chondrocytes were using IF 
staining of Collagen II (PA5-99159, 1:100, Thermo Fisher) and Tolui­
dine Blue staining (G3660, Solarbio Technology Co., Ltd., China).
4.5. Culture of TMJ synovial macrophages
Synovium of SD rats was collected and digested with type IV colla­
genase (C4-BIOC, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 ◦C for 1-2 h, filtered through a 
40 μm cell strainer, centrifuged, and resuspended in fresh medium. Non- 
adherent cells were incubated in uncoated dishes for 24 h. After 
removing non-adherent lymphocytes, the adherent cells were cultured 
for 1-2 weeks, with medium changes every 2 days. Residual non- 
macrophages were eliminated by 0.05% trypsin treatment and M0 
macrophages were confirmed by detecting CD45 and CD11b expression. 
Uptake of Fmoc-DDT@Fos was assessed by IF. IFN-γ (20 ng/mL; I3275, 
Sigma-Aldrich) and LPS (100 ng/mL; 916374, Sigma-Aldrich) were used 
to induce M1 macrophages. Ferroptosis was induced by Treating with 
5 μM Erastin (HY-15763, MedChemExpress, USA).
4.6. IF staining
Samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), blocked with 5% 
BSA, and incubated overnight at 4 ◦C with primary antibodies from 
Abcam (rabbit anti-SYK, ab155187, 1:500; rabbit anti-CD206, ab64693, 
1:500; rabbit anti-CD45, ab281586, 1:50), Thermo Fisher (rabbit anti- 
CD86, 942-RBM4-P1, 1:500; rabbit anti-Collagen II, PA5-99159, 
1:100; rabbit anti-ACSL4, MA5-42756, 1:100; mouse anti-GPX4, 2879- 
MSM1-P0, 1:100), and Proteintech (mouse anti-CD80, 66406, 1:100). 
After PBS rinsing, Alexa Fluor 594 (ab150116, 1:200, Abcam) or Alexa 
Fluor 488 (ab150077, 1:200, Abcam) secondary antibodies were applied 
for 1 h at RT, followed by DAPI staining (C1002, Beyotime) for 10 min. 
Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of Fmoc-DDT@Fos regulation of macrophage reprogramming and ferroptosis during TMJ OA.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
12 
Samples were imaged using a fluorescence microscope and fluorescence 
coverage was quantified using ImageJ Pro Plus 6.0.
4.7. Flow cytometry experiment
Processing cell and tissue samples to obtain detectable cell suspen­
sions. For macrophage analysis, cells were stained with anti-CD45-FITC 
(554877, BD Biosciences), anti-CD11b-FITC (554861, BD Biosciences), 
and anti-CD80-PE (555014, BD Biosciences). M1 macrophages were 
identified using anti-CD86-FITC (555018, BD Biosciences), and M2 
macrophages with anti-CD206/Goat anti-Rabbit IgG H&L (Alexa Fluor 
488) (ab64693/ab150077, Abcam) and anti-CD163-APC (ab314947, 
Abcam).
4.8. In vitro biosafety evaluation
CCK-8 cell viability assay: cells were seeded in a 96-well plate 
overnight and cultured with different treatment for different time. After 
treatment, 10 μL CCK-8 (C0041, Beyotime) was added to each well for 
2 h. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader 
(BioTek, USA) with absorbance levels directly reflecting cell viability.
Live/dead cell staining: cells were seeded in 24-well plates and 
cultured with a complete medium containing Fmoc-DDT@Fos for 1, 3, 
and 5 days. Cells were incubated with 200 μL live/dead staining solution 
(PF00007, Proteintech) for 30 min at RT. Observations were made using 
a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200, Carl Zeiss Inc., USA).
4.9. Hemolysis test
Fmoc-DDT@Fos solutions (3.13-100 μg/mL) were prepared, with 
PBS as a negative control and deionized water as a positive control. 
Fresh human whole blood (IPHASE, China) containing EDTA was mixed 
with each solution at specified ratios and incubated at 37 ◦C for 3 h. 
Following centrifugation, the supernatant was collected, and hemoglo­
bin release was determined by recording absorbance at 540 nm with a 
spectrophotometer.
4.10. Histopathological analysis
H&E and Safranin O-Fast Green staining were performed using a 
H&E Staining Kit (C0105S, Beyotime) and Safranin O-Fast Green kit 
(G1371, Solarbio Science & Technology, China) according to the man­
ufacturer's protocol to examine the pathological changes in rats tissues 
using TMJ tissue section. The sections were scanned and imaged using a 
slide scanner (Aperio ScanScope CS, Leica Biosystems, Germany).
4.11. WB
Total protein was extracted using RIPA lysis buffer with 1% PMSF 
(P0013B, Beyotime). Protein was separated by 8-12% SDS-PAGE at 
120V and transferred to PVDF membranes (1620177, Bio-Rad) at 
250 mA. Membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat milk for 1 h, incubated 
overnight at 4 ◦C with primary antibodies (Table S3), washed, and then 
incubated for 1 h at RT with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies 
(ab6721 or ab205719, Abcam; 1:5000). Bands were visualized using 
ECL reagent (1705062, Bio-Rad, USA) and imaged (ImageQuant LAS 
4000C, GE Healthcare, USA). Total protein levels were normalized to 
GAPDH and target protein expression was calculated based on band 
intensity ratios.
4.12. ELISA
Expression levels of IL-6, TNF-α, IL-10, and TGF-β in cell superna­
tants were quantified using ELISA kits (E-EL-R0015, E-EL-R2856, E-EL- 
R0016, E-EL-R1015; Elabscience, China). Briefly, standards and samples 
were incubated in antibody-coated wells, washed, and treated 
sequentially with biotinylated antibodies, HRP-conjugated secondary 
antibodies, and TMB substrate. Color development was terminated with 
stop solution, and absorbance at 450 nm was measured.
4.13. EdU staining
Cells were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated with EdU solution 
(10 μmol/L; ST067, Beyotime) for 1 h. After removing the culture me­
dium, the cells were fixed for 15 min using 4% PFA, then washed twice 
with PBS. The cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 for 
20 min, followed by two additional washes with PBS. EdU staining so­
lution was applied for 30 min in the dark, followed by nuclear staining 
with DAPI for 5 min. Random fields of view were observed under a 
fluorescence microscope (FM-600, Pudong Optical Instruments Co., 
China) and the number of positive cells was recorded.
4.14. Transwell assay
A 100 μL aliquot of the cell suspension (2.5 × 104 cells/mL) was 
added to the upper chamber of the Transwell insert, while 500 μL of 
medium was added to the lower chamber. After 24 h of incubation, the 
upper chamber was removed, and non-migrated cells were carefully 
wiped off using a cotton swab. The migrated cells were then fixed for 
30 min with 4% PFA. Following fixation, the cells were stained with 
0.1% crystal violet (C0121, Beyotime) for 30 min. Five random fields 
were imaged under an inverted microscope (IXplore Pro, Olympus, 
Japan) and the number of migrated cells was quantified.
4.15. Scratch assay
A 6-well plate was pre-marked on the underside with parallel lines at 
0.5-1 cm intervals. Chondrocytes were seeded and grown to full 
confluence. A straight scratch was made perpendicular to the pre- 
marked lines using a 200 μL pipette tip, followed by replacement with 
serum-free medium. Images of the wound region were obtained at 0 and 
24 h using an optical microscope (DM500, Leica), and the wound closure 
rate was determined by measuring the scratch width at each time point 
with ImageJ-Pro Plus 6.0 software.
4.16. Cell apoptosis detection
Cell apoptosis was quantified utilizing an Annexin V-FITC/PI 
detection kit (C1062L, Beyotime). The treated chondrocytes were 
resuspended in binding buffer, then added with 10 μL Annexin V-FITC 
and 5 μL PI. After cultured at room temperature in the dark for 15 min, 
the cell apoptosis was analyzed using a FACScan flow cytometer (BD 
FACSCalibur) within 20 min.
4.17. RNA-seq and data analysis
Bulk RNA-seq was conducted by CapitalBio Technology (Beijing, 
China) using 5 μg of total RNA per sample. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) was 
removed with the Ribo-Zero Magnetic Kit (MRZG12324, Epicentre, 
USA), and strand-specific libraries were prepared using the NEBNext 
Ultra RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (E7760S, NEB, USA). RNA was 
fragmented (~300 bp) in NEBNext First Strand Synthesis Reaction 
Buffer, followed by first- and second-strand cDNA synthesis in dUTP 
Mix. The resulting fragments were end-repaired, polyadenylated, and 
ligated with Illumina adapters. The second strand was selectively 
degraded with USER Enzyme (M5508, NEB, USA). Libraries were PCR- 
amplified, purified, checked on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, quanti­
fied with the KAPA Library Quantification Kit (kk3605, Merck, USA), 
and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq CN500 platform in paired-end 
mode.
Raw paired-end reads were assessed with FastQC (v0.11.8). Adapters 
and poly (A) tails were removed using Cutadapt (v1.18), and reads 
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
13 
containing >5% ambiguous bases (N) were discarded via a custom Perl 
script. Quality filtering was performed with the FASTX Toolkit 
(v0.0.13), retaining reads with at least 70% of bases exhibiting a Phred 
score greater than 20. The paired-end reads were subsequently repaired 
with BBMap and aligned to the rat reference genome using HISAT2 
(v0.7.12). mRNA count data were analyzed in R utilizing the Limma 
package, with DEGs defined as |log2FC| > 2 and p < 0.05. Functional 
enrichment analysis of DEGs for GO (BP, MF, and CC categories) was 
performed with ClusterProfiler, and visualized with bubble and circle 
plots. KEGG pathway enrichment was conducted using the same cutoff 
criteria and visualized manner.
4.18. Proteomics sequencing and analysis
Total protein was extracted and protein concentration was measured 
by BCA assay, normalized, adjusted to pH 8.0, and digested with trypsin. 
Digested peptides were purified with ZipTip C18, separated by HPLC, 
and analyzed by MS/MS using MaxQuant for protein identification and 
quantification.
For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, desalted peptides were labeled 
with iTRAQ reagent containing 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed in 
triplicate on a QSTAR Elite Hybrid MS (Applied Biosystems/MDS- 
SCIEX) coupled to an online HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan). For 
each run, 30 μL of peptide solution was injected onto a custom nano- 
bore C18 column with an integrated nano-spray tip (New Objectives, 
Woburn, MA). Peptides were separated over a 90-min gradient using 
mobile phase A (0.1% FA, 2% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (0.1% 
FA, 100% acetonitrile) at 0.2 μL/min, with flow splitting to maintain a 
constant 30 μL/min delivery. The mass spectrometer was operated in 
positive ion mode (m/z 300-2000), targeting +2 to +4 precursor ions. 
The three most intense peptide ions per MS/MS spectrum were frag­
mented with dynamic exclusion (30 s, ±30 mDa), automatic collision 
energy, and intelligent information-dependent acquisition. The frag­
ment intensity multiplier was set at 20, with a maximum accumulation 
time of 2 s.
At the end of the proteomics dataset collection, we analyzed the data 
using the Maxquan software (t v.1.6.15.0) to exhaustively search, pro­
cess and analyze the dataset. We implemented strict screening criteria: a 
1% false discovery rate (FDR) was required for spectra, peptides and 
protein levels in proteomics. We then obtained intensity values for each 
protein or peptide in the different samples and screened for DEPs 
(p < 0.05 and |log2fold change| > 1). Subsequently, the identified DEPs 
were analyzed for GO terms and KEGG pathway enrichment.
4.19. qRT-PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted utilizing the Trizol reagent (A33254, 
Thermo Fisher). cDNA was synthesized with the Reverse Transcription 
Kit (RR047A, Takara, Japan), and quantitative PCR was performed 
using the SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™ II kit (DRR081, Takara) on an 
ABI7500 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher). The sequences of all 
primers were synthesized and provided by Sangon Biotech as shown in 
Table S4. The relative mRNA expression levels were calculated using the 
2−ΔΔCt method and normalized to Gapdh.
4.20. Iron content testing
Intracellular Fe2+ levels in macrophages were visualized using the 
FerroOrange probe (F374, Dojindo, Japan). Pre-treated cells were 
seeded in confocal dishes, washed with Hank's balanced salt solution 
(HBSS; 13150016, Gibco), and subsequently exposed to 1 μM FerroOr­
ange for 30 min before imaging with a laser scanning confocal micro­
scope (LSM780, Zeiss). The total iron content was determined using Iron 
Assay Kit (MAK025, Sigma-Aldrich). Samples were centrifuged to obtain 
the supernatant. Each 100 μL supernatant was mixed with 35 μL Reagent 
A, 5 μL Reagent B, and 150 μL Reagent C and incubated for 30 min. The 
OD was measured at 359 nm using an Epoch Microplate Spectropho­
tometer (BioTek). Iron ion concentrations were assessed from a standard 
curve for iron ions and normalized by protein concentrations.
4.21. Biochemical assays
GSH, GSSG, and MDA levels in samples were examined utilizing the 
GSH/GSSG Assay Kit (S0053, Beyotime) and the MDA Assay Kit 
(BC0025, Solarbio) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Lipid 
peroxidation was evaluated by incubating cells in confocal dishes with 
5 μM C11-BODIPY581/591 (D3861, Thermo Fisher) in the dark for 
15 min, followed by fluorescence microscopy imaging. ROS levels were 
quantified using a ROS Assay Kit (S0033S, Beyotime), 2′,7′-Dichlor­
odihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) was diluted to 10 μM in 
serum-free medium (1:1000) and incubated with cells for 20 min. After 
washes, fluorescence was visualized with a fluorescence microscope 
(FV-1000/ES, Olympus, Japan) and analyzed using ImageJ.
4.22. TEM
Samples were fixed at 4 ◦C overnight in 2.5% glutaraldehyde (P1126, 
Solarbio Science & Technology), followed by post-fixation in 1% 
osmium tetroxide (115355, AIKE Reagent, China) for 1-2 h. Samples 
were dehydrated through graded ethanol (50-95%) and pure acetone, 
embedded in resin, and polymerized at 70 ◦C overnight. Ultrathin sec­
tions (70-90 nm) were cut with a Reichert ultramicrotome, stained with 
lead citrate and 50% ethanol-saturated uranyl acetate (15 min each), 
and examined by TEM.
4.23. MMP assay
MMP was evaluated using the JC-1 MMP Assay Kit (40706ES60, 
Yeasen Biotechnology, China). Cells in 6-well plates were incubated 
with 1 mL JC-1 staining solution at 37 ◦C for 20 min. For the positive 
control, CCCP (50 mM) was diluted to 50 μM and treated for 20 min. 
After staining, cells were washed twice with 1 × JC-1 buffer, resus­
pended in 2 mL culture medium, and examined under a fluorescence or 
confocal microscope. JC-1 monomers were detected at 490 nm excita­
tion and 530 nm emission.
4.24. Rat TMJ OA model construction and treatment
TMJ OA was induced in six-week-old female SD rats by injection of 
MIA (I2512, Sigma-Aldrich) into the joint cavity. The animals were 
randomly divided into three groups: sham, TMJ OA (MIA + PBS), and 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos (MIA + Fmoc-DDT@Fos). Rats were anesthetized with 
1% pentobarbital (0.35 mL/0.1 kg) and fixed on a sterile operating table, 
and 50 μL MIA (I2512, Sigma-Aldrich) solution (0.5 mg/50 μL PBS) was 
injected into the joint cavity in the TMJ OA and TMJ OA + Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos groups, and 50 μL PBS in the sham group. After 1 week, the 
Fmoc-DDT@Fos group received a joint injection of 50 μL Fmoc- 
DDT@Fos solution (0.5 mg/50 μL PBS), and the sham and TMJ OA 
groups were injected with an equal amount of PBS. Rats were euthanized 
by CO2 inhalation after 4 weeks of treatment. Rat serum samples were 
collected and analyzed using an automated biochemical analyzer (BK- 
400, BIOBASE Biodustry, China) to measure serum levels of CK, LDH, 
ALT, AST, CREA, and UREA. TMJs and major organs (heart, liver, 
spleen, lungs, kidneys) were collected for subsequent analysis [65,66].
4.25. Micro-CT
To examine and document the macroscopic features of the TMJs, 
samples were scanned using a micro-CT system (μCT50, Scanco Medical, 
Switzerland) at 70 kV and 114 μA, with an effective pixel size of 6 μm. 
The condyles were reconstructed in the sagittal and coronal views using 
Mimics software, and the structural characteristics of the bone were 
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
14 
analyzed using CTvox software. The evaluations included calculating 
the bone volume (BV) to total volume (TV) ratio (BV/TV, %) and 
trabecular separation (Tb. Sp, mm).
4.26. IHC staining
Sections were blocked with normal goat serum (E510009, Sangon 
Biotech, China) at RT for 20 min. After blocking, primary antibodies 
against SYK (ab155187, 1:100, Abcam) and Col2α (PA5-99159, 1:100, 
Thermo Fisher) were applied and incubated overnight at 4 ◦C. Sections 
were washed three times and the HRP-labeled secondary antibody 
(ab6721, 1:5000, Abcam) is then incubated for 60 min. The DAB 
Staining Kit (P0203, Beyotime) was used to develop color, applying a 
drop of chromogen to the samples for 6 min, followed by hematoxylin 
staining for 5 min. Sections were dehydrated, cleared in xylene, and 
mounted with neutral resin. Observations and analyses were performed 
under an upright microscope (BX63, Olympus, Japan).
4.27. Prussian Blue staining
Fe3+ deposition in rat TMJ tissues was assessed using a Prussian Blue 
Iron Stain Kit (G1424, Solarbio Science & Technology). Tissues were 
fixed in 4% PFA, dehydrated, cleared, paraffin-embedded, and sectioned 
at 5 μm. Sections were baked at 60 ◦C, dewaxed to water, and stained 
with Prussian Blue, followed by rinsing, rapid clearing, and mounting 
with neutral resin. Images were acquired under a light microscope, and 
Fe3+ was quantified using Olyvia software.
4.28. Statistical analysis
Data were derived from at least three independent experiments and 
are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Two-group compari­
sons employed the independent-samples t-test, while multi-group ana­
lyses used one-way ANOVA with Tukey's post-hoc test. Analyses were 
conducted in GraphPad Prism 9.5.0 and R 4.2.1, with p < 0.05 deemed 
significant.
Ethical statement
All the animal experiments were complied with the National In­
stitutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and 
received approval from the Institution of Animal Care and Use Com­
mittee (IACUC) of the Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine (approval no. SH9H-2023-A197- 
SB).
Funding
This study was supported by National Key R&D Program of China 
(2023YFC2509100), Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai 
Municipality (23Y31900400), National Natural Science Foundation of 
China (82571118, 82370984 & 82370980), China Postdoctoral Science 
Foundation (2025M781698), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai 
(22ZR1437600), and Shanghai's Top Priority Research Center 
(2022ZZ01017).
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yuxin Zhang: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation, Visuali­
zation. Dahe Zhang: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, 
Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization. Xiaokun Yue: 
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, 
Methodology, Validation. Qingyu Xu: Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Resources. Lingtong Bu: Data curation, 
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology. 
Jiajia Lu: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing. Chi Yang: Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Software, Validation. Pei Shen: 
Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Project adminis­
tration, Writing – review & editing. Jisi Zheng: Conceptualization, 
Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
None.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2026.102906.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] M. Kaneda, Y. Shimpo, K. Yoshida, R. Kubo, F. Kobayashi, A. Mishima, C. Igarashi, 
H. Tomonari, Structural features of the temporomandibular joint evaluated by MRI 
and their association with oral function and craniofacial morphology in female 
patients with malocclusion: a cross-sectional, Study, JCM 14 (2025) 4921, https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/jcm14144921.
[2] G. Gerbino, M. Omed`e, E. Raveggi, S. Silvestri, E. Zavattero, G. Ramieri, 
Temporomandibular joint ankylosis: long-term outcomes with one-stage resection 
and reconstruction using total joint alloplastic Replacement-A 20-Year experience, 
JCM 14 (2025) 4639, https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm14134639.
[3] S.I. Macías-Hern´andez, J.D. Morones-Alba, I. Tapia-Ferrusco, O.B. V´elez-Guti´errez, 
C. Hern´andez-Diaz, T.I. Nava-Bringas, E. Cruz-Medina, L.C. Toro, Ma. de los A. 
Soria-Bastida, A home-based exercise program for temporomandibular joint 
osteoarthritis: pain, functionality, and joint structure, JKAOMS 48 (2022) 50–58, 
https://doi.org/10.5125/jkaoms.2022.48.1.50.
[4] Z. Huang, R. Yang, L. Zhang, M. Zhu, C. Zhang, J. Wen, H. Li, BRD4 inhibition 
alleviates mechanical stress-induced TMJ OA-like pathological changes and 
attenuates TREM1-mediated inflammatory response, Clin. Epigenet. 13 (2021), 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13148-021-01008-6.
[5] W. Yuan, Y. Wu, M. Huang, X. Zhou, J. Liu, Y. Yi, J. Wang, J. Liu, A new frontier in 
temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis treatment: exosome-based therapeutic 
strategy, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 10 (2022), https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fbioe.2022.1074536.
[6] M. Wieckiewicz, K. Boening, P. Wiland, Y.Y. Shiau, A. Paradowska-Stolarz, 
Reported concepts for the treatment modalities and pain management of 
temporomandibular disorders, J. Headache Pain 16 (2015) 106, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s10194-015-0586-5.
[7] M. Taqi, S.J.A. Zaidi, S. uddin Siddiqui, B. Zia, M. Khadija Siddiqui, Dental 
practitioners' knowledge, management practices, and attitudes toward 
collaboration in the treatment of temporomandibular joint disorders: a mixed- 
methods study, BMC Prim. Care. 25 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1186/s12875-024- 
02398-1.
[8] G.M. Tartaglia, A. Gizdulich, M. Farronato, R.J. Gupta, S.T. Connelly, 
Electroporation technique for joint pain-Pilot feasibility study on TMD patients, 
Clin. Exp. Dental Res. 6 (2020) 642–649, https://doi.org/10.1002/cre2.327.
[9] H. Minakuchi, M. Fujisawa, Y. Abe, T. Iida, K. Oki, K. Okura, N. Tanabe, 
A. Nishiyama, Managements of sleep bruxism in adult: a systematic review, 
Japanese dental, Sci. Rev. 58 (2022) 124–136, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jdsr.2022.02.004.
[10] E.-P. Alona, E. Ilana, One year into the COVID-19 pandemic-temporomandibular 
disorders and bruxism: what we have learned and what we can do to improve our 
manner of treatment, Dent. Med. Probl. 58 (2021) 215–218, https://doi.org/ 
10.17219/dmp/132896.
[11] P.M.M. Moleirinho-Alves, A.M.C.S. de Almeida, P.M.T.C. Cebola, R.A.N. da 
S. Oliveira, P.L.C. de Pezarat-Correia, Effects of therapeutic and aerobic exercise 
programs in temporomandibular disorder-associated headaches, J. Appl. Oral Sci. 
29 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-7757-2021-0059.
[12] G. Trisolino, M. Favero, D. Dallari, E. Tassinari, F. Traina, M. Otero, S.R. Goldring, 
M.B. Goldring, C. Carubbi, R. Ramonda, S. Stilli, B. Grigolo, E. Olivotto, Labral 
calcification plays a key role in hip pain and symptoms in femoroacetabular 
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
15 
impingement, J. Orthop. Surg. Res. 15 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018- 
020-01610-z.
[13] G.R. Burmester, S.B. Cohen, K.L. Winthrop, P. Nash, A.D. Irvine, A. Deodhar, 
E. Mysler, Y. Tanaka, J. Liu, A.P. Lacerda, H. Palac, T. Shaw, P.J. Mease, 
E. Guttman-Yassky, Safety profile of upadacitinib over 15 000 patient-years across 
rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and atopic 
dermatitis, RMD Open 9 (2023) e002735, https://doi.org/10.1136/rmdopen- 
2022-002735.
[14] N. Al Fayez, M.S. Nassar, A.A. Alshehri, M.K. Alnefaie, F.A. Almughem, B. 
Y. Alshehri, A.O. Alawad, E.A. Tawfik, Recent advancement in mRNA vaccine 
development and applications, Pharmaceutics 15 (2023) 1972, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/pharmaceutics15071972.
[15] J. Xi, L.R. Lei, W. Zouzas, X. April Si, Nasally inhaled therapeutics and vaccination 
for COVID-19: developments and challenges, MedComm 2 (2021) 569–586, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/mco2.101.
[16] N. Falcone, M. Ermis, D.G. Tamay, M. Mecwan, M. Monirizad, T.G. Mathes, 
V. Jucaud, A. Choroomi, N.R. de Barros, Y. Zhu, N.E. Vrana, H. Kraatz, H. Kim, 
A. Khademhosseini, Peptide hydrogels as immunomaterials and their use in cancer 
immunotherapy delivery, Adv Healthcare Materials 12 (2023), https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adhm.202301096.
[17] J. Lu, J. Cai, Z. Zhou, J. Ma, T. Han, N. Lu, L. Zhu, Gel@CAT-L hydrogel mediates 
mitochondrial unfolded protein response to regulate reactive oxygen species and 
mitochondrial homeostasis in osteoarthritis, Biomaterials 321 (2025) 123283, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123283.
[18] J. Lu, X. Shi, Q. Fu, Y. Li, Z. Zhou, N. Lu, L. Zhu, Extracellular vesicles from 
inflammatory-stimulated BMSCs ameliorate osteoarthritis via Rpl14 mediated 
synovial macrophage polarization, Chem. Eng. J. 499 (2024) 156541, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cej.2024.156541.
[19] A.J. Morwood, I.A. El-Karim, S.A. Clarke, F.T. Lundy, The role of extracellular 
matrix (ECM) adhesion motifs in functionalised hydrogels, Molecules 28 (2023) 
4616, https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules28124616.
[20] W. Sheng, Q. Song, X. Su, Y. Lu, Y. Bai, F. Ji, L. Zhang, R. Yang, X. Fu, Sodium 
alginate/gelatin hydrogels loaded with adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells 
promote wound healing in diabetic rats, J. Cosmet. Dermatol. 22 (2023) 
1670–1679, https://doi.org/10.1111/jocd.15631.
[21] Y. Zhang, D. Zhang, Q. Xu, S. Xia, P. Shen, C. Yang, Fostamatinib alleviates 
temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis by maintaining cartilage homeostasis 
through MAPK/NF-κB and AKT/mTOR pathways, Int. Immunopharmacol. 147 
(2025) 113996, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intimp.2024.113996.
[22] T. Guan, J. Li, C. Chen, Y. Liu, Self-assembling peptide-based hydrogels for wound 
tissue repair, Adv. Sci. 9 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202104165.
[23] X. Li, H. Zhang, L. Liu, C. Cao, P. Wei, X. Yi, Y. Zhou, Q. Lv, D. Zhou, T. Yi, De novo 
design of self-assembly hydrogels based on Fmoc-diphenylalanine providing drug 
release, J. Mater. Chem. B 9 (2021) 8686–8693, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
d1tb01628h.
[24] B. Shan, F. Wu, Hydrogel-based growth factor delivery platforms: strategies and 
recent advances, Adv. Mater. 36 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.202210707.
[25] Y. Li, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, R. Crawford, Y. Xiao, Synovial macrophages in cartilage 
destruction and regeneration-lessons learnt from osteoarthritis and synovial 
chondromatosis, Biomed. Mater. 17 (2021) 012001, https://doi.org/10.1088/ 
1748-605x/ac3d74.
[26] J. Zhao, Y. Feng, X. Liu, H. Li, H. Guo, J. Ke, X. Long, The relationship of ALPK1, 
hyaluronic acid and M1 macrophage polarization in the temporomandibular joint 
synovitis, J. Cell Mol. Med. 28 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.18172.
[27] M. Kharaziha, A. Baidya, N. Annabi, Rational design of immunomodulatory 
hydrogels for chronic wound healing, Adv. Mater. 33 (2021), https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adma.202100176.
[28] J. Zhang, D. Tong, H. Song, R. Ruan, Y. Sun, Y. Lin, J. Wang, L. Hou, J. Dai, J. Ding, 
H. Yang, Osteoimmunity-regulating biomimetically hierarchical scaffold for 
augmented bone regeneration, Adv. Mater. 34 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.202202044.
[29] Y. Wang, J. Wang, R. Gao, X. Liu, Z. Feng, C. Zhang, P. Huang, A. Dong, D. Kong, 
W. Wang, Biomimetic glycopeptide hydrogel coated PCL/nHA scaffold for 
enhanced cranial bone regeneration via macrophage M2 polarization-induced 
osteo-immunomodulation, Biomaterials 285 (2022) 121538, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2022.121538.
[30] F.N. Novikov, M.V. Panova, I.Y. Titov, V.S. Stroylov, O.V. Stroganov, G.G. Chilov, 
Inhibition of SYK and cSrc kinases can protect bone and cartilage in preclinical 
models of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, Sci. Rep. 11 (2021), https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-021-02568-6.
[31] P. Ma, L. Yue, H. Yang, Y. Fan, J. Bai, S. Li, J. Yuan, Z. Zhang, C. Yao, M. Lin, 
Q. Hou, Chondroprotective and anti-inflammatory effects of amurensin H by 
regulating TLR4/Syk/NF-κB signals, J. Cell Mol. Med. 24 (2019) 1958–1968, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.14893.
[32] J. Paik, Correction to: fostamatinib: a review in chronic immune 
thrombocytopenia, Drugs 81 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-021-01540- 
y, 1361-1361.
[33] K. Sae-khow, A. Charoensappakit, K. Udompornpitak, W. Saisorn, J. Issara- 
Amphorn, T. Palaga, A. Leelahavanichkul, Syk inhibitor attenuates lupus in 
FcγRIIb-/- mice through the inhibition of DNA extracellular traps from 
macrophages and neutrophils via p38MAPK-dependent pathway, Cell Death 
Discov. 11 (2025), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41420-025-02342-x.
[34] L. Cai, S. Liu, J. Guo, Y.-G. Jia, Polypeptide-based self-healing hydrogels: design 
and biomedical applications, Acta Biomater. 113 (2020) 84–100, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.actbio.2020.07.001.
[35] R. Binaymotlagh, L. Chronopoulou, C. Palocci, Peptide-based hydrogels: template 
materials for tissue engineering, JFB. 14 (2023) 233. https://doi.org/10.3390/jf 
b14040233.
[36] Y. Li, T. Zheng, Y. Du, B. Zhao, H.P. Patel, R. Boldt, G.K. Auernhammer, A. Fery, 
J. Li, J. Thiele, Titanium dioxide nanoparticles embedded in assembled dipeptide 
hydrogels for microfluidic photodegradation, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 654 (2024) 
405–412, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2023.09.191.
[37] Y. Wang, Q. Geng, Y. Zhang, L. Adler-Abramovich, X. Fan, D. Mei, E. Gazit, K. Tao, 
Fmoc-diphenylalanine gelating nanoarchitectonics: a simplistic peptide self- 
assembly to meet complex applications, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 636 (2023) 
113–133, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2022.12.166.
[38] J. Liu, X. Song, F. Kuang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xie, R. Kang, G. Kroemer, D. Tang, NUPR1 is 
a critical repressor of ferroptosis, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021), https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41467-021-20904-2.
[39] Z. Huang, G. Chen, H. Wu, X. Huang, R. Xu, F. Deng, Y. Li, Ebselen restores peri- 
implantitis-induced osteogenic inhibition via suppressing BMSCs ferroptosis, Exp. 
Cell Res. 427 (2023) 113612, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2023.113612.
[40] Y. Zhang, R.V. Swanda, L. Nie, X. Liu, C. Wang, H. Lee, G. Lei, C. Mao, P. Koppula, 
W. Cheng, J. Zhang, Z. Xiao, L. Zhuang, B. Fang, J. Chen, S.-B. Qian, B. Gan, 
mTORC1 couples cyst(e)ine availability with GPX4 protein synthesis and 
ferroptosis regulation, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 
021-21841-w.
[41] G. Lei, Y. Zhang, P. Koppula, X. Liu, J. Zhang, S.H. Lin, J.A. Ajani, Q. Xiao, Z. Liao, 
H. Wang, B. Gan, The role of ferroptosis in ionizing radiation-induced cell death 
and tumor suppression, Cell Res. 30 (2020) 146–162, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41422-019-0263-3.
[42] X. He, D. Wang, Y. Yi, Y. Tan, M. Wu, H. Wang, W. Hu, H. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. Wu, 
δ-Tocotrienol preconditioning improves the capability of bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells in promoting wound healing by inhibiting BACH1-related 
ferroptosis, Cell Death Discov. 9 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41420-023- 
01653-1.
[43] H. Chen, Z. Han, Y. Wang, J. Su, Y. Lin, X. Cheng, W. Liu, J. He, Y. Fan, L. Chen, 
H. Zuo, Targeting ferroptosis in bone-related diseases: facts and perspectives, JIR 
16 (2023) 4661–4677, https://doi.org/10.2147/jir.s432111.
[44] D.A. Reed, Y. Zhao, M. Han, L.G. Mercuri, M. Miloro, Mechanical loading disrupts 
focal adhesion kinase activation in mandibular fibrochondrocytes during murine 
temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis, J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 79 (2021) 2058. 
e1–2058.e15, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joms.2021.05.001.
[45] M.D. Ansari, H. Majid, A. Khan, Y. Sultana, Clinical frontiers of metabolic bone 
disorders: a comprehensive review, Metab Target Organ Damage 4 (2023), https:// 
doi.org/10.20517/mtod.2023.38.
[46] R.H. Brophy, Y.A. Fillingham, AAOS clinical practice guideline summary: 
management of osteoarthritis of the knee (Nonarthroplasty), third edition, J. Am. 
Acad. Orthop. Surg. 30 (2022) e721–e729, https://doi.org/10.5435/jaaos-d-21- 
01233.
[47] Z. Zhou, J. Lu, M. Yang, J. Cai, Q. Fu, J. Ma, L. Zhu, The mitochondrial unfolded 
protein response (UPRmt) protects against osteoarthritis, Exp. Mol. Med. 54 (2022) 
1979–1990, https://doi.org/10.1038/s12276-022-00885-y.
[48] A. Bar, E. Ruvinov, S. Cohen, Live imaging flow bioreactor for the simulation of 
articular cartilage regeneration after treatment with bioactive hydrogel, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 115 (2018) 2205–2216, https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.26736.
[49] M. Zewail, N. Nafee, N. Boraie, Intra-articular dual drug delivery for synergistic 
rheumatoid arthritis treatment, J. Pharmaceut. Sci. 110 (2021) 2808–2822, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xphs.2021.04.001.
[50] Y. Zhao, S. Song, D. Wang, H. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Wang, X. Ren, Y. Zhao, 
Nanozyme-reinforced hydrogel as a HO-driven oxygenerator for enhancing 
prosthetic interface osseointegration in rheumatoid arthritis therapy, Nat. 
Commun. 13 (2022) 6758, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-34481-5.
[51] N. Raina, R. Pahwa, J. Bhattacharya, A.K. Paul, V. Nissapatorn, M. de Lourdes 
Pereira, S.M.R. Oliveira, K.G. Dolma, M. Rahmatullah, P. Wilairatana, M. Gupta, 
Drug delivery strategies and biomedical significance of hydrogels: translational 
considerations, Pharmaceutics 14 (2022) 574, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
pharmaceutics14030574.
[52] F. Barry, F. Chai, H. Chijcheapaza-Flores, M.J. Garcia-Fernandez, N. Blanchemain, 
R. Nicot, Systematic review of studies on drug-delivery systems for management of 
temporomandibular-joint osteoarthritis, J. Stomatol. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 123 
(2022) e336–e341, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jormas.2021.08.003.
[53] X. Cen, X. Pan, B. Zhang, C. Liu, X. Huang, Z. Zhao, Hyaluronan injection versus 
oral glucosamine and diclofenac in the treatment of temporomandibular joint 
osteoarthritis, Clin. Oral Invest. 26 (2021) 2703–2710, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00784-021-04241-8.
[54] Q. Qiao, X. Liu, T. Yang, K. Cui, L. Kong, C. Yang, Z. Zhang, Nanomedicine for 
acute respiratory distress syndrome: the latest application, targeting strategy, and 
rational design, Acta Pharm. Sin. B 11 (2021) 3060–3091, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.apsb.2021.04.023.
[55] K.B. Onel, D.B. Horton, D.J. Lovell, S. Shenoi, C.A. Cuello, S.T. Angeles-Han, M. 
L. Becker, R.Q. Cron, B.M. Feldman, P.J. Ferguson, H. Gewanter, J. Guzman, 
Y. Kimura, T. Lee, K. Murphy, P.A. Nigrovic, M.J. Ombrello, C.E. Rabinovich, 
M. Tesher, M. Twilt, M. Klein-Gitelman, F. Barbar-Smiley, A.M. Cooper, 
B. Edelheit, M. Gillispie-Taylor, K. Hays, M.L. Mannion, R. Peterson, E. Flanagan, 
N. Saad, N. Sullivan, A.M. Szymanski, R. Trachtman, M. Turgunbaev, K. Veiga, A. 
S. Turner, J.T. Reston, 2021 American college of rheumatology guideline for the 
treatment of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: therapeutic approaches for oligoarthritis, 
temporomandibular joint arthritis, and systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
Arthritis Rheumatol. 74 (2022) 553–569, https://doi.org/10.1002/art.42037.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
16 
[56] K.B. Onel, D.B. Horton, D.J. Lovell, S. Shenoi, C.A. Cuello, S.T. Angeles-Han, M. 
L. Becker, R.Q. Cron, B.M. Feldman, P.J. Ferguson, H. Gewanter, J. Guzman, 
Y. Kimura, T. Lee, K. Murphy, P.A. Nigrovic, M.J. Ombrello, C.E. Rabinovich, 
M. Tesher, M. Twilt, M. Klein-Gitelman, F. Barbar-Smiley, A.M. Cooper, 
B. Edelheit, M. Gillispie-Taylor, K. Hays, M.L. Mannion, R. Peterson, E. Flanagan, 
N. Saad, N. Sullivan, A.M. Szymanski, R. Trachtman, M. Turgunbaev, K. Veiga, A. 
S. Turner, J.T. Reston, 2021 American college of rheumatology guideline for the 
treatment of juvenile idiopathic arthritis: therapeutic approaches for oligoarthritis, 
temporomandibular joint arthritis, and systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis, 
Arthritis Care Res. 74 (2022) 521–537, https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.24853.
[57] T. Ootake, T. Ishii, K. Sueishi, A. Watanabe, Y. Ishizuka, K. Amano, M. Nagao, 
K. Nishimura, Y. Nishii, Effects of mechanical stress and deficiency of 
dihydrotestosterone or 17β-estradiol on temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis in 
mice, Osteoarthr. Cartil. 29 (2021) 1575–1589, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
joca.2021.08.005.
[58] J. Lu, Y. Li, J. Cai, X. Jin, G. Chu, H. Jin, L. Zhu, A. Chen, Biocompatibility and 
therapeutic efficacy of crosslinked hydrogel filled 3D-printed nerve conduit for 
sacral nerve injury repair, Biomaterials 320 (2025) 123230, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2025.123230.
[59] J. Qiu, B. Wu, S.B. Goodman, G.J. Berry, J.J. Goronzy, C.M. Weyand, Metabolic 
control of autoimmunity and tissue inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis, Front. 
Immunol. 12 (2021), https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.652771.
[60] S.E. Di Carlo, J. Raffenne, H. Varet, A. Ode, D.C. Granados, M. Stein, R. Legendre, 
J. Tuckermann, C. Bousquet, L. Peduto, Depletion of slow-cycling PDGFRα+
ADAM12+ mesenchymal cells promotes antitumor immunity by restricting 
macrophage efferocytosis, Nat. Immunol. 24 (2023) 1867–1878, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41590-023-01642-7.
[61] N. Santana-Codina, A. Gikandi, J.D. Mancias, The role of NCOA4-Mediated 
ferritinophagy in ferroptosis, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. (2021) 41–57, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-030-62026-4_4.
[62] A. Ajoolabady, D. Tang, G. Kroemer, J. Ren, Ferroptosis in hepatocellular 
carcinoma: mechanisms and targeted therapy, Br. J. Cancer 128 (2022) 190–205, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-022-01998-x.
[63] X. Yang, N.K. Kawasaki, J. Min, T. Matsui, F. Wang, Ferroptosis in heart failure, 
J. Mol. Cellular Cardiol. 173 (2022) 141–153, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
yjmcc.2022.10.004.
[64] B.Y. Chen, J.L. Pathak, H.Y. Lin, W.Q. Guo, W.J. Chen, G. Luo, L.J. Wang, X.F. Sun, 
Y. Ding, J. Li, T.G.H. Diekwisch, C. Liu, Inflammation triggers chondrocyte 
ferroptosis in TMJOA via HIF-1α/TFRC, J. Dent. Res. 103 (2024) 712–722, https:// 
doi.org/10.1177/00220345241242389.
[65] J. Guo, K. Su, L. Wang, B. Feng, X. You, M. Deng, W.S. Toh, J. Wu, B. Cheng, J. Xia, 
Poly(p-coumaric acid) nanoparticles alleviate temporomandibular joint 
osteoarthritis by inhibiting chondrocyte ferroptosis, Bioact. Mater. 40 (2024) 
212–226, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.06.007.
[66] X.-D. Wang, X.-X. Kou, D.-Q. He, M.-M. Zeng, Z. Meng, R.-Y. Bi, Y. Liu, J.-N. Zhang, 
Y.-H. Gan, Y.-H. Zhou, Progression of cartilage degradation, bone resorption and 
pain in rat temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis induced by injection of 
iodoacetate, PLoS One 7 (2012) e45036, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pone.0045036.
Y. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Materials Today Bio 37 (2026) 102906 
17 
