Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Denosumab attenuates knee osteoarthritis
progression by inhibiting synovial
inﬂammation via the RANK/TRAF6/FSTL1
signalling
Yuxiang Hu1,10, Wei Chen2,3,4,10, Shenghui Lan5,6,10, Chaochang Ming7,10,
Dongdong Xu1, Haitao Li8, Hao Xu1, Deyao Shi1, Weijian Liu1, Zhipeng Dai7,
Jian Wang8, Zhili He9, Weihua Xu1, Zengwu Shao1, Yong Liu1, Hongtao Tian
1
&
Wei Tong
1
Synovitis has recently been shown to be a critical early stage in development of
osteoarthritis (OA), and inhibiting synovitis signiﬁcantly alleviates OA symp-
toms. Denosumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting RANKL, previously
developed for osteoporosis. Here, we report the effect of denosumab on
ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), attenuating synovitis and consequently OA
progression. We ﬁrst demonstrate that RANKL is highly expressed in the knee
synovium of OA mice, as well as in patients. Next, we show that denosumab,
injected systemically, accumulates in the synovium and effectively reduces
synovitis through RANK/TRAF6/FSTL1 signalling in post-traumatic, inﬂamma-
tory, and aged OA murine models and a beagle dog OA model, delaying OA
progression. Finally, a single-arm clinical trial with primary endpoints of VAS
and OKS scores, and secondary endpoints of WOMAC score and adverse
events rate, shows that denosumab alleviates synovitis and pain, improving
joint function in knee OA patients. These ﬁndings provide a translational basis
for using denosumab to treat knee OA in the clinic.
Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is one of the most common degenerative joint
diseases and a major cause of pain and disability1, affecting an esti-
mated 250 million people worldwide2. Knee OA is a whole-joint dis-
order characterized by articular cartilage destruction, subchondral
bone sclerosis, osteophyte formation and inﬂammation of the synovial
membrane3–6. Despite extensive research, the complex pathological
mechanisms underlying the onset and development of OA remain
unknown. Consequently, no disease-modifying drugs are available,
and current treatments are limited to painkillers such as non-steroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs) until the joint deteriorates to the
stage where surgery is necessary. However, NSAIDs can cause gastro-
intestinal and cardiovascular side effects7, while surgery carries risks of
Received: 1 September 2024
Accepted: 31 October 2025
Check for updates
1Department of Orthopaedics, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. 2Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Hebei Medical University Third Hospital, Shi Jiazhuang, Hebei, China. 3NHC Key Laboratory of Intelligent Orthopaedics Equipment (Hebei
Medical University Third Hospital), Shi Jiazhuang, Hebei, China. 4Engineering Research Centre of Orthopaedic Minimally-invasive Intelligent Equipment, Ministry
of Education, Shi Jiazhuang, Hebei, China. 5Department of Orthopaedics, The Eighth People’s Hospital, Jiangsu University, Shanghai, China. 6Department of
Orthopaedics, Xuhui Branch of The Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 7Department of Orthopaedics, Henan Provincial
People’s Hospital, Xinxiang Medical University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. 8Department of Orthopaedics, Afﬁliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University,
Guiyang, China. 9The Central Hospital of Wuhan, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China. 10These
authors contributed equally: Yuxiang Hu, Wei Chen, Shenghui Lan, Chaochang Ming.
e-mail: 2007xh0813@hust.edu.cn; tongwei312@hust.edu.cn
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
infection and other complications. Therefore, new drugs are urgently
needed to treat knee OA in the early stages.
Recently, we and others have found that synovial inﬂammation
(synovitis), characterized by synovial lining hyperplasia, inﬁltration of
macrophages and lymphocytes, neoangiogenesis and ﬁbrosis, is
strongly associated with cartilage degeneration, abnormal sub-
chondral bone remodelling and osteophyte formation8. Many studies
have demonstrated that synovitis is associated with pain and poor
function, and it is thus considered to play a critical role in radiographic
OA onset and structural progression4,9,10. Both mechanical and non-
mechanical factors can transform FLSs to an activated, pathological
states during OA, whereupon they secrete various pro-inﬂammatory
and chondrocyte catabolic cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor
(TNF), interleukins (ILs), receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand
(RANKL), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and a disintegrin and
metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) family
members. These factors contribute to joint damage, pain, and OA
progression11,12. Therefore, targeting synovitis is a promising ther-
apeutic strategy for OA.
Denosumab is used to treatosteoporosis (OP) and giant cell tumour
of bone, acting by downregulating the RANKL/RANK signalling pathway
thereby inhibiting the maturation of monocyte–macrophage–osteoclast
lineage cells13, which play a signiﬁcant role in synovial inﬂammation and
potentially OA progression. Although denosumab has been shown to
attenuate OA progression in mouse models of post-traumatic OA by
modifying subchondral bone remodelling14, the detailed mechanisms
remain largely uncharacterized. Furthermore, its efﬁcacy in OA patients
requires further validation, as rodent joint biomechanics and physiology
differ signiﬁcantly from those of humans15.
In this work, we use three different murine OA models–post-
traumatic, inﬂammatory and aged OA, and a beagle dog knee OA
model to validate the effects of denosumab on synovitis and OA pro-
gression. Following this, we conduct a single-arm clinical trial, and ﬁnd
that denosumab attenuates synovitis, reduces joint pain and improves
joint function in OA patients. These effects are likely mediated by the
RANK/TRAF6/FSTL1 signalling pathway in FLSs.
Results
Expression of RANK and RANKL in healthy and pathological
joint tissues
We ﬁrst investigated the expression levels of RANK and RANKL in OA
progression in a mouse model at 4, 8, and 12 weeks post-
destabilisation of the medial meniscus (DMM) in mice. Immunohisto-
chemical staining revealed that RANK and RANKL expression in
articular cartilage (AC) were not signiﬁcantly different from the sham
groups, but both were markedly increased in synovial membrane (SM)
of DMM-induced mice at 4 weeks. Furthermore, expression levels of
RANK and RANKL in AC and SM gradually increased over 8 and
12 weeks post-DMM and were more enriched in SM than AC (Fig. 1A–C).
Next, we assessed the expression level of RANKL in human healthy and
OA joint ﬂuid using ELISA. Results showed that RANKL expression was
signiﬁcantly increased in OA joint ﬂuid compared to healthy joint ﬂuid
(Fig. 1D). We then obtained normal human AC and SM tissues from
thigh amputation or hemipelvectomy and OA-affected AC and SM
tissues from knee arthroplasty of patients at the Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College (Wuhan, China), for western blot and PCR analyses.
The results conﬁrmed that, compared with normal AC and SM, the
expression levels of RANK and RANKL were signiﬁcantly increased in
OA AC and SM, particularly in the OA SM (Fig. 1E, F). To further con-
solidate our conclusion, mouse chondrocytes, FLSs and macrophages
were isolated from AC or SM and incubated with IL-1β for 24 h to
induce inﬂammation. In line with the previous data, the expression of
RANK and RANKL was markedly higher in IL-1β-induced chondrocytes
and macrophages and especially in IL-1β-induced FLSs (Fig. 1G). PCR
assay
of
RANK
and
RANKL
in
IL-1β-induced
chondrocytes,
macrophages and FLSs showed the same result (Fig. 1H). Previous
studies have identiﬁed ColVI as a marker for FLSs11,16. Therefore, we
performed co-immunoﬂuorescence staining of RANK or RANKL with
ColVI to mark FLSs. As shown in Fig. 1I and Supplementary Fig. 1A,
RANK+ cells, RANKL+ cells and ColVI+ cells were all obviously increased
in OA synovium (Fig. 1J and Supplementary Fig. 1B). Strikingly,
assessment of the proportions of the cell population revealed a change
in percentage from 40% to 65% of RANKL+ ColVI+ / ColVI+ (Fig. 1K) and
33% to 55% of RANK+ ColVI+ / ColVI+ (Supplementary Fig. 1C) at 8 weeks
after DMM surgery, indicating that FLSs expressing RANK and RANKL
greatly expanded under OA conditions. In summary, these data sug-
gest that FLSs with higher expression of RANK and RANKL are strongly
associated with OA initiation and progression.
Denosumab ameliorated OA progression in post-traumatic,
inﬂammatory and aged OA models
Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody targeting RANKL, so we ﬁrst
sought to study its effects in a DMM-induced mouse post-traumatic OA
model. Safranin-O/Fast Green staining revealed that cartilage erosion
was mild in both femoral condyle and tibial plateau of DMM knees at 4
weeks post-surgery but aggravated at 8 and 12weeks post-surgery.
However, in denosumab-treated DMM mice, there was a signiﬁcant
retention of proteoglycan and a marked reduction in the thickness of
calciﬁed cartilage areas at 8 and 12 weeks compared to DMM controls
(Fig. 2A). Further analysis demonstrated that denosumab reduced the
Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) score to 28.6%
and 29.5% at 8 and 12 weeks, respectively, in OA progression compared
with DMM controls (Fig. 2A). We next performed haematoxylin and
eosin (H&E) staining of synovium and found abundant inﬂammatory
cell inﬁltration and synovial hyperplasia at 4, 8 and 12 weeks post-
DMM. Treatment with denosumab signiﬁcantly inhibited these
inﬂammatory effects and reduced the synovitis score (Fig. 2B–E).
Micro-CT analysis to evaluate subchondral bone remodelling revealed
that DMM caused signiﬁcant subchondral bone resorption. However,
this detrimental effect was effectively reversed by denosumab treat-
ment (Fig. 2G). The results were further conﬁrmed by quantitative
analysis of structural parameters, including BV/TV and thickness of
subchondral bone plates (SBP. Th) (Fig. 2H). Furthermore, tartrate-
resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining revealed hyperactivity of
osteoclasts in the DMM group, which was inhibited after denosumab
treatment (Supplementary Fig. 2A). Osteophytes, one of the main
radiographic features of OA, have signiﬁcant clinical implications and
can be a cause of pain and loss of function1,17. At 8 weeks post-DMM, we
observed osteophyte formation and radiological focal defects in both
the medial tibial plateau and femoral condyle of mice in the DMM
group. Denosumab treatment signiﬁcantly reduced both osteophyte
formation and OA grades compared to the DMM group (Fig. 2F, H and
Supplementary Fig. 2B). Since osteophytes are possibly derived from
GDF5-lineage cells in synovium18,19, we performed IHC staining of
GDF5. Consistent with previous studies, we found a large number of
GDF5+ cells in the region where the synovium attached to the edge of
the AC in the 8-week post-DMM mice. Intriguingly, GDF5+ cells were
markedly reduced in the denosumab-treated mice compared with
DMM mice (Supplementary Fig. 2C, D), indicating that denosumab
inhibited
osteophyte
formation
by
reducing
the
numbers
of
osteophyte-derived cells. Markers of cartilage matrix degradation,
MMP-13 and ADAMTS5, were also signiﬁcantly reduced, whereas
Col2a1 and Aggrecan were correspondingly increased in denosumab-
treated DMM knees (Supplementary Fig. 2E, F). Moreover, the von Frey
assay revealed that the paws of DMM mice were sensitive to the sti-
mulus, whereas denosumab improved the paw withdrawal threshold
(PWT) compared with control DMM mice (Fig. 2I), suggesting that
denosumab heightens mechanical pain sensitivity after DMM.
There are several types of OA, which may be the main reason for
the heterogeneous response to drugs20. We further evaluated the
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
2
therapeutic effects of denosumab on a mono-iodoacetate (MIA)-
induced inﬂammatory OA rat model. Histology showed that intra-
articular injection of MIA resulted in an irregular surface and a focal
area of cartilage loss and degeneration, while denosumab greatly
attenuated this phenotype (Fig. 3A), due to reduced levels of
ADAMTS5 and MMP-13 (Supplementary Fig. 3A, B). H&E staining
showed that obvious inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration and hyperplasia in
MIA synovium were signiﬁcantly alleviated by denosumab treatment
(Fig. 3B). Denosumab also produced an elevation in the PWT in MIA-
treated rats compared with vehicle-treated MIA rats, consistent with
the DMM model (Supplementary Fig. 3C).
Moreover, we also investigated the effect of denosumab in an age-
induced OA model. In line with other studies, mice displayed moderate
cartilage degradation at 18 months of age, while administration of
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
3
denosumab caused a partial but signiﬁcant reduction in cartilage
degeneration and OARSI scores (Fig. 3C). Synovial hyperplasia ana-
lysed by H&E staining was observed in 18-month-old mice and was
attenuated after treatment with denosumab (Fig. 3D). IHC results
further conﬁrmed that the expression of MMP-13 and ADAMTS5 was
upregulated in old mice, but both were downregulated in denosumab-
treated old mice (Supplementary Fig. 3C, D).
Finally, denosumab treatment did not alter the body weight,
mechanical pain sensitivity, microscopic morphology of the main
organs (heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney and knee joint), or liver and
kidney function, spontaneous locomotor activity, nor did it induce
anxiety-like behaviours in mice (Supplementary Fig. 4). Taken toge-
ther, all these results demonstrated the therapeutic effect of denosu-
mab in delaying synovitis and OA progression, and conﬁrmed that this
treatment was harmless in vivo.
Denosumab alleviated RANKL/RANK-mediated synovitis in FLSs
As OA is a complex disease involving multiple tissues of the whole
joint, we next tried to identify the main tissues and speciﬁc cell type
responding to denosumab. We ﬁrst investigated the distribution of
denosumab in vivo. Mice were injected subcutaneously with denosu-
mab, ﬂuorescently labelled with CY5.5 dye (red), and this revealed that
denosumab primarily distributed in the synovium, compared to other
tissues of the joint (Supplementary Fig. 5A, B).
We next harvested cells from the whole joint of sham, DMM and
DMM + denosumab groups at 4 weeks after DMM surgery for single-
cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), including cartilage, subchondral
bone, meniscus, and synovium (Fig. 4A). Based on the expression of
marker genes (Supplementary Table 5), uniform manifold approx-
imation and projection (UMAP) identiﬁed 14 distinct single-cell clus-
ters: ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), chondrocytes, seven groups of
immune cells (neutrophils, basophils, macrophages, monocytes, den-
dritic cells, T cells, and B cells), haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs),
endothelial cells, Schwann cells, pericytes and erythrocytes (Fig. 4B).
Interestingly, among all the clusters with increased cell proportions
after DMM, FLSs showed the most dramatic decrease in cell proportion
after denosumab treatment (Fig. 4C). Consequently, we explored the
intercellular communication among FLSs, chondrocytes and macro-
phages, contributing to cartilage erosion and joint inﬂammation.
Interestingly, we identiﬁed that FLSs, as the dominant communication
“hub”, dramatically increased the number and strength of commu-
nications with the other two cell types during OA. However, these
effects were strongly inhibited by denosumab treatment (Fig. 4D),
indicating that FLSs were the main denosumab-responsive cells. Next,
we analysed the detailed changes in the outgoing and incoming signals
among FLSs, chondrocytes and macrophages. We found that in the
DMM group, FLSs were the dominant contributors to the outgoing
inﬂammatory signals, including TNF, IL6, CCL, CSF and MIF (Supple-
mentary Fig. 6A). On the other hand, the communication patterns of
incoming signals revealed that chondrocytes were the main receivers
of the inﬂammatory signals secreted by FLSs, both of which were sig-
niﬁcantly inhibited by denosumab treatment (Supplementary Fig. 6B).
These data suggested that in the early stages of OA, activated OA FLSs
are the main contributors to the propagation of inﬂammation and
destruction
of
the
cartilage
matrix,
acting
by
secreting
pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines and proteolytic enzymes. Denosumab mark-
edly blocked the pro-inﬂammation mediators secreted by FLSs,
thereby alleviating the structural progression of OA.
To verify the effects of RANKL and denosumab on FLSs, mouse
FLSs were incubated with RANKL or denosumab for 24 h before RNA
was extracted for mRNA sequencing. We identiﬁed differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) that were upregulated in RANKL-treated FLSs
but were signiﬁcantly inhibited after denosumab treatment, including
MMP-13, MMP-9, ADAMTS5, ADAMTS4 and TNF-α, shown as a heatmap
(Supplementary Fig. 6C). KEGG pathway analysis revealed that these
DEGs were enriched in the TNF signalling pathway, the NF-κB signal-
ling pathway and the IL-17 signalling pathway (Supplementary
Fig. 6D). Furthermore, GO analysis revealed that these DEGs were
strongly associated with inﬂammatory response, osteoclast differ-
entiation, cellular response to interleukin-1 and extracellular matrix
catabolic enzymes (Supplementary Fig. 6E), indicating that denosu-
mab signiﬁcantly attenuated RANKL-mediated inﬂammatory reaction
in FLSs. Further western blot and PCR analyses also conﬁrmed that
MMP-13 and TNF-α expression levels in mouse FLSs were signiﬁcantly
increased by RANKL, while these changes were abolished in
denosumab-treated FLSs (Fig. 4E and Supplementary Fig. 7A). Inter-
estingly, when we treated chondrocytes directly with RANKL, we
found that RANKL induced modest but not signiﬁcant catabolic
effects on chondrocytes (Supplementary Fig. 7B–D). Therefore, we
speculated that RANKL, and consequently denosumab, are more
likely to inﬂuence chondrocytes in an indirect manner through FLSs.
We harvested conditioned medium (CM) from FLSs after RANKL
treatment (RANKL-CM) without or with denosumab (RANKL + deno-
sumab-CM) treatment. Western blotting and PCR demonstrated that
RANKL-CM markedly reduced anabolic gene expression (Col2a1) and
increased catabolic gene expression (Col10a1) in chondrocytes, while
RANKL + denosumab-CM signiﬁcantly reversed these changes (Fig. 4F
and Supplementary Fig. 7E). In addition, RANKL-CM signiﬁcantly
increased CD86 expression and reduced Arg1 expression to induce
M1 macrophage polarisation. Similarly, these effects were markedly
reversed by RANKL + denosumab-CM, as demonstrated by western
blotting and immunoﬂuorescence staining (Fig. 4G and Supplemen-
tary Fig. 7F). Meanwhile, a transwell assay also showed that RANKL-
CM induced the migration ability of macrophages, which was sub-
stantially inhibited by RANKL + denosumab-CM (Supplementary
Fig. 7G). To further consolidate our conclusion in vivo, we injected
RANKL with or without denosumab into the mouse knee joints once a
week for 4 weeks. Safranin-O/Fast Green staining showed mild carti-
lage surface erosion in the RANKL-treated knees, a typical sign of early
OA, but this was attenuated by denosumab treatment, in line with
changes in the OARSI score (Fig. 4H, I). H&E staining showed that the
synovial lining layer was thickened and had higher synovitis scores in
RANKL-treated knees but not in denosumab-treated knees compared
to vehicle (Fig. 4J, K).
In conclusion, we validated the proinﬂammatory function of
RANKL on FLSs, which possibly indirectly induces chondrocyte cata-
bolism and M1 macrophage polarisation, thereby promoting OA pro-
gression. These effects were signiﬁcantly attenuated by denosumab.
Fig. 1 | Expression levels of RANK and RANKL in cartilage and synovium.
A, B Immunostaining of RANK or RANKL in AC and SM of sham and DMM mice at 4,
8 and 12 weeks after surgery. Scale bar = 50 μm. AC, articular cartilage; SM, synovial
membrane. Representative images are from six independent experiments. C The
percentages of RANK+ or RANKL+ cells within AC and SM at 4, 8 and 12 weeks post-
DMM were quantiﬁed (n = 6, biological replicates). D RANKL expression level in the
joint ﬂuid among normal and OA patients (n = 6, biological replicates). E, F Western
blot and RT-PCR analysis of RANK and RANKL in human articular cartilage and
synovial membrane (n = 3, biological replicates). G, H Western blot and RT-PCR
analysis of RANK and RANKL in mouse chondrocytes, FLSs and macrophages
treated with IL-1β (10 ng/mL) compared with vehicle. CH, chondrocytes; FLSs,
ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes (n = 3, biological replicates). I Representative co-
immunostaining of ColVI (red) and RANKL (green) in synovial membrane of sham
and DMM mice, counterstained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar = 50 μm. J, K Percentage
of ColVI+, RANKL+ and ColVI+; RANKL+ over ColVI+ were calculated (n = 6, biological
replicates). Source data and P values are provided in the Source Data ﬁle. Data are
presented as median with interquartile range. Statistical analysis was performed
using unpaired two-tailed t-test (J, K) or two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test (D) and
one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test (C,E,F,G,H) for multiple comparisons.
ns = not signiﬁcant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
4
FSTL1 expression in FLSs was strongly associated with DMM-
induced OA progression but was signiﬁcantly down-regulated
by denosumab treatment
Next, we focused on the DEGs in the FLS cluster. We identiﬁed DEGs
that were upregulated in the DMM group but were signiﬁcantly
inhibited after denosumab treatment. GO analysis showed that these
DEGs were inﬂammation-related functional genes, such as regulation
of inﬂammatory response, leucocyte migration involved in inﬂam-
matory response, leucocyte aggregation, chronic inﬂammation
response and leucocyte cell−cell adhesion (Fig. 5A). Among them,
follistatin-like protein 1 (FSTL1) was the most signiﬁcantly expressed
gene in the FLS cluster (Fig. 5B–D). IHC staining conﬁrmed the pre-
sence of higher amounts of FSTL1 on the SM of DMM-induced mice
compared to the sham group, while this increase was signiﬁcantly
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
5
attenuated by denosumab treatment (Supplementary Fig. 8). Fur-
thermore, co-immunoﬂuorescence staining of FSTL1 with the FLS
marker ColVI revealed that the percentage of FSTL1+ ColVI+ / ColVI+
was signiﬁcantly reduced in the DMM + denosumab group compared
to DMM controls (Fig. 5E). Previous studies demonstrated that FSTL1
is a biomarker of joint damage in OA patients21, and the levels of this
protein correlate with OA severity (assessed by Kellgren–Lawrence
[KL] and Western Ontario and McMaster Universities arthritis index
[WOMAC] scores)22. In our work, we found that FSTL1 markedly
upregulated
proinﬂammatory
factors
(TNF-α,
IL-1β,
MMP-13,
ADAMTS5) in FLSs and cartilage catabolic factors (Col10a1, MMP-13,
ADAMTS5) in chondrocytes, but these were both signiﬁcantly atte-
nuated by denosumab (Supplementary Fig. 9A–D). Moreover,
FSTL1 signiﬁcantly enhanced macrophage migration, which was sub-
stantially blocked by denosumab (Supplementary Fig. 9E). In sum-
mary, these data suggest that FSTL1 expression in FLSs is positively
correlated with OA progression and conﬁrmed that denosumab res-
cues OA cartilage degeneration by targeted downregulation of FSTL1
in FLSs.
Denosumab inhibited activation of RANKL-induced TRAF6/NF-
κB pathways in FLSs
To further clarify the mechanism by which denosumab regulates FSTL1
expression in FLSs, KEGG pathway enrichment was performed. Results
showed that DEGs in FLSs were highly enriched in the TNF and NF-κB
signalling pathways (Fig. 6A), which play important roles in synovitis
and OA pathobiology23,24. Therefore, we focused on the expressions of
these key factors involved in the NF-κB and TNF signalling pathways
after RANKL or RANKL + denosumab treatment. Notably, the expres-
sion of FSTL1, TRAF6 and phosphorylated IκBα were signiﬁcantly
increased after stimulation with RANKL (Fig. 6B). Additionally, RANKL
increased the expression of p50 and p65 in the SM (Supplementary
Fig. 10A). Moreover, incubation of FLSs with RANKL in vitro upregu-
lated the expression of total p50 and p65 and their nuclear co-
localisation (Fig. 6B, C). However, denosumab treatment reversed all
these effects of RANKL induction. To demonstrate whether denosu-
mab participated in TRAF6 interaction with RANK after stimulation
with RANKL, Co-IP experiments were performed. As shown in Fig. 6D,
TRAF6 was clearly bound to RANK after stimulation of FLSs with
RANKL; however, this effect was abolished by denosumab treatment.
Thus, we speculated that denosumab prevents RANKL from binding to
the
RANK–TRAF6
receptor
complex,
thereby
inhibiting
FSTL1
expression in FLSs via the NF-κB pathway.
In order to verify the function of this signalling pathway, TRAF6
siRNA and BAY11-7082, an NF-κB inhibitor, were introduced to FLSs.
We found that the expression of TRAF6 was signiﬁcantly down-
regulated by TRAF6 siRNA compared with NC siRNA (Supplementary
Fig. 10B, C) and either TRAF6 siRNA or BAY11-7082 markedly sup-
pressed the expression of FSTL1 and phosphorylated IκBα induced by
RANKL (Fig. 6E). Moreover, RANKL-induced total p50 and p65
expression and nuclear translocation were also substantially inhibited
by TRAF6 siRNA and BAY11-7082 (Fig. 6E, F, H and Supplementary
Fig. 10D). These results indicated that RANKL-regulated FSTL1
expression depended exclusively on RANK/TRAF6/NF-κB signalling,
which was abolished by denosumab (Fig. 6G).
To further clarify the pro-inﬂammatory and chondrocyte cata-
bolic effects of the TRAF6/FSTL1 axis, we knocked down the expres-
sion of TRAF6 and FSTL1 in FLSs, which were subsequently incubated
with RANKL (Supplementary Fig. 11A, B). The results revealed that
downregulation of TRAF6 or FSTL1 strongly attenuated the expression
of chondrocyte catabolic (MMPs and ADAMTSs) and inﬂammatory
(TNF-α) cytokines induced by RANKL in FLSs (Fig. 6I and Supplemen-
tary Fig. 11C).
Together, these results led to the conclusion that the effects of
RANKL are mediated via the RANK/TRAF6/NF-κB axis, which upregu-
lates FSTL1, promoting synovitis and chondrocyte catabolism, and
thereby inducing OA progression. Denosumab downregulates this
signalling axis, thereby attenuating synovial inﬂammation and sub-
sequent OA development.
Denosumab alleviated synovitis in a larger animal (Beagle)
OA model
Based on the therapeutic efﬁcacy of denosumab observed in vitro and
in vivo in mice, we used surgical anterior cruciate ligament transection
(ACLT)-induced OA in the beagle dog knee as a large animal model
(Fig. 7A), which is more comparable to humans25. According to the
OARSI canine OA scoring system26, OA-like lesions were grossly
observed in the femoral condyle at 2 months after ACLT surgery in a
macroscopic view. In contrast, administration of denosumab inhibited
AC damage in beagle dogs after ACLT surgery, as shown by a smooth
surface and a reduced cartilage score (Fig. 7B). MRI analysis showed
that treatment with denosumab protected against cartilage loss as well
as the formation of articular hydrops, demonstrated by higher carti-
lage thickness and reduced effusion-synovitis scores observed in
denosumab-treated beagle dogs at 2 months after ACLT surgery
(Fig. 7C, D). Safranin-O/Fast Green staining demonstrated that com-
pared with the sham group, the tibial plateau exhibited obvious car-
tilage damage and proteoglycan loss in the ACLT group. However, the
denosumab-treated tibial plateau displayed only minor signs of
degeneration and preserved cartilage integrity, effectively alleviating
cartilage wear (Fig. 7E, F). H&E staining further showed that denosu-
mab treatment alleviated synovitis, demonstrated by decreased
synovial hyperplasia and inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells, when ana-
lysed by synovitis scoring in denosumab-treated beagle dogs (Fig. 7E,
F). Similarly, we did not observe any obvious morphologic changes in
heart, liver, spleen, lung or kidney in denosumab-treated beagle dogs
(Supplementary Fig. 12). Because denosumab attenuates OA progres-
sion in larger animals, these ﬁndings suggest that denosumab has the
potential to be used clinically to treat patients with OA.
Denosumab alleviated synovitis in OA patients
A randomised placebo-controlled phase 2a trial published in Nature
Medicine by Wittoek et al. demonstrated that denosumab delayed
hand OA progression27. However, the anatomy of the knee joint is
different from that of the hand, so we explored whether denosumab
exerted any effects on synovitis by a single-arm clinical trial on knee
Fig. 2 | Denosumab treatment delayed OA progression in a DMM mouse model.
A Safranin O/Fast green staining of knee joints in the indicated mouse groups at 4, 8
and 12 weeks after DMM surgery. Scale bar = 200 μm. The OA severity of knee joints
was evaluated using the OARSI score (n = 6, biological replicates). B–D H&E staining
images showing the inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells and thickness of the synovium
(dashed lines) in the indicated groups at 4, 8 and 12 weeks after DMM surgery.
Magniﬁed images of the boxed areas are shown in the panel on the right. Scale bar =
500 μm (left image); 100 μm (right image). Representative images are from six
independent experiments. E Synovitis scores were measured (n = 6, biological
replicates). F Representative views of the anterior of the knee joints in the indicated
mouse groups derived from micro-CT analysis at 8 weeks after DMM surgery. Red
arrowheads indicate osteophyte formation. G Three-dimensional μCT images of
the sagittal view of medial tibial subchondral bone at 8 weeks after DMM surgery.
(H) Quantiﬁcation of the grade of OA change and tibial subchondral bone: BV/TV,
thickness of subchondral bone plate (SBP. Th) (n = 6, biological replicates). I Pain
analysis was performed using the von Frey assay to assess paw withdrawal
threshold (PWT) at 0, 2, 4, 6 and 8 weeks after DMM surgery (n = 6, biological
replicates). Source data and P values are provided in the Source Data ﬁle. Data are
presented as median with interquartile range. Statistical analysis was performed
using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple comparisons
(A, E, H, I). ns = not signiﬁcant, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
6
Fig. 3 | Denosumab treatment delayed OA progression in MIA-induced or aged
murine models. A Safranin O/Fast green staining of knee joints from vehicle, MIA
and MIA + denosumab rats. Scale bar = 200 μm. The OA severity of the knee joints
was evaluated using the OARSI score (n = 6, biological replicates). B H&E staining of
synovium in vehicle, MIA and MIA + denosumab rats. Scale bar = 100 μm. Synovitis
scores were measured (n = 6, biological replicates). C Safranin O/Fast green staining
of knee joints in young (3-month-old), old (18-month-old) and old + denosumab
mice. Scale bar= 200 μm. The OAseverity ofthe knee joints wasevaluated using the
OARSI score (n = 6, biological replicates). D H&E staining of synovium in the young,
old and old + denosumab mice. Scale bar = 100 μm. Synovitis scores were measured
(n = 6, biological replicates). Source data and P values are provided in the Source
Data ﬁle. Data are presented as median with interquartile range. Statistical analysis
was performed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple
comparisons (A–D). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
7
OA patients.In line with Wittoek et al., we found that OKS, WOMAC and
VAS scores decreased gradually after injection compared with base-
line, with the most signiﬁcant improvement observed at the ﬁnal
follow-up (Supplementary Fig. 13A). Moreover, MRI showed that, at
baseline, the synovium was obviously thickened and there was a large
amount of effusion in the joint cavity and suprapatellar bursa, whereas
the manifestations of synovitis were signiﬁcantly improved at
6 months after systemic injection of denosumab, with signiﬁcant
improvements in Hoffa-synovitis and effusion-synovitis scores (Sup-
plementary Fig. 13B, C). In addition, OA patients who needed total knee
arthroplasty were injected with denosumab three weeks before sur-
gery. The synovium near the femoral condyle was then harvested for
H&E, IHC staining and western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig. 14A).
Notably, H&E staining demonstrated that the layers of lining cells were
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
8
remarkably increased, showing villous hyperplasia in OA synovium,
whereas only a slight increase of lining cells was observed in
denosumab-treated synovium (Supplementary Fig. 14B). Further IHC
staining and western blotting conﬁrmed that the release proﬁles of
RANKL, FSTL1, proinﬂammatory cytokines (IL-1β, TNF-α) and col-
lagenases (MMP-13, ADAMTS5) within OA synovium were higher than
those in OA + denosumab synovium (Supplementary Fig. 14C, D).
These data further conﬁrmed our ﬁndings in animal models, indicating
an important role of FLS-mediated synovitis in OA treatment by
denosumab.
Discussion
OA is a complex disease characterized by pathological changes in all
joint tissues, including cartilage, subchondral bone, ligaments,
menisci, joint capsules, and synovium28,29. A study published in 2020
by Di Chen demonstrated that synovial inﬂammation is a critical event
during the pathological changes of OA in the entire joint12. It is not only
the starting factor of joint inﬂammation, but also causes lesions in
other joint tissues such as cartilage and subchondral bone. Consistent
with Professor Di Chen, we clearly observed that synovial inﬂammation
at 4 weeks after DMM surgery and this was aggravated over time,
occurring earlier than the observed cartilage degradation at 4 weeks
and osteophyte formation at 8 weeks post-surgery. Furthermore, by
analysing cell–cell interaction based on single-cell RNA sequencing, we
found that at 4 weeks after DMM surgery, FLSs were the dominant
communication “hub” acting by releasing bone and cartilage-
damaging factors such as TNF, IL6, CCL, CSF and MIF. These factors
further aggravated cartilage damage and the local inﬂammatory
response. Collectively, our results suggest that synovial inﬂammation
is a critical event in the development of OA, and that FLSs could be a
potential target for early clinical intervention.
RANKL is reported to be highly expressed on synovial ﬁbroblasts
and induces osteoclasts to resorb bone, as well as expressing MMPs that
accelerate cartilage degradation30–32. However, it has never been repor-
ted that RANKL directly drives synovial inﬂammation. In the present
study, we found that RANKL is mostly upregulated in synovium com-
pared to other joint tissues. Speciﬁcally, stimulation of FLSs with pro-
inﬂammatory IL-1β showed that RANKL secretion by FLSs was markedly
increased upon stimulation with pro-inﬂammatory cytokines. On the
other hand, stimulation of FLSs with RANKL also modulated the pro-
duction of inﬂammatory mediators, suggesting an association between
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and RANKL in the initiation of OA patho-
genesis. Based on this, we directly injected RANKL into mouse knee
joints and found that RANKL induced synovitis. Together, our results
suggest that the molecular and pathological changes in the synovium
during OA progression, including enhanced expression of inﬂammatory
cytokines and development of inﬂamed, hypertrophied synovial tissues,
promote RANKL expression in the synovium, which then induces
cartilage-damaging mediators to cause cartilage degeneration.
Previous studies have reported that certain OP treatments
attenuate cartilage damage and OA progression in several animal
models33–35. However, the results of clinical trials using OP treatment
have not shown any consistent disease-modifying improvement36,37.
Denosumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody that inhibits bone
resorption by binding to RANKL and preventing it from activating NF-κB
in monocyte–macrophage–osteoclast lineage cells38. Thus, it is used to
treat diseases related to abnormal activation of osteoclasts, such as OP
and giant cell tumour of bone39. Recently, it has been reported that
denosumab ameliorates abnormal subchondral bone remodelling and
thus delays OA progression in a DMM-induced mouse model, as well as
improving joint function in hand OA14,27. Consistent with the previous
study, our data here proved that denosumab treatment effectively
suppressed osteoclast activation and abnormal subchondral bone
remodelling in a DMM model. More importantly, denosumab also sig-
niﬁcantly inhibited synovitis in OA murine models, which is another
therapeutic mechanism. Although the temporal relationship between
the synovitis and abnormal subchondral bone remodelling is still not
known, we suggest that the dual effects of denosumab in inhibiting
abnormal subchondral bone remodelling and synovitis are responsible
for the protective effect on OA. However, different OA subtypes exhibit
different pathologies and respond to treatments differently40. Addi-
tionally, conﬁrmation in larger animals is necessary, since their joint
structures and loading conditions are more similar to humans.
In this study, we demonstrated that denosumab signiﬁcantly
delayed OA progression in DMM-induced, MIA-induced and aging-
induced OA murine models. To further determine the role of deno-
sumab in OA treatment, we used a larger animal model and found that
denosumab also exerted a chondroprotective effect in beagle dogs. In
addition, MRI showed that, at 1 month after systemic injection of
denosumab, the manifestation of synovitis was somewhat alleviated,
whereas synovitis signiﬁcantly improved at 2 months after systemic
injection of denosumab. Lastly, we designed a single-arm clinical trial
and found that denosumab relieved synovial inﬂammation and knee
joint pain, thus improving the joint function of patients with knee OA.
All these effects were mediated via FLS-induced synovitis.
Our results showed that denosumab inhibited synovitis and OA
via TRAF6/NF-κB pathway-induced FSTL1. FSTL1 is a secreted extra-
cellular glycoprotein that was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a transforming growth
factor β1 (TGF-β1)-inducible protein41. Previous studies have reported
that FSTL1 is involved in diverse biological processes, including cell
proliferation
and
differentiation,
wound
healing,
inﬂammatory
response, skeletal muscle growth and ﬁbrosis42–44. However, conﬂict-
ing reports exist regarding the function of FSTL1 in OA. Chaly et al.
reported that FSTL1 played an important role in maintaining cartilage
homoeostasis by enhancing cell proliferation, survival and anabolic
activity in articular chondrocytes44, whereas Hu et al. found that FSTL1
was a serum biomarker that reﬂected the severity of joint damage and
secreted MMPs and inﬂammatory factors in chondrocytes45. Con-
sistent with the ﬁndings reported by Hu et al., our work here demon-
strated that FSTL1 markedly upregulated cartilage catabolic and
proinﬂammatory factors such as Col10a1, MMP-13, and ADAMTS5 in
chondrocytes and FLSs. Interestingly, stimulation of FLSs with RANKL
Fig. 4 | The proinﬂammatory and chondrocyte catabolic effects of RANKL
on FLSs. A Design of scRNA-seq experiment. Created in BioRender. Hu, Y. (2025)
https://BioRender.com/esd3e6h. B Visualization of UMAP plot pooled from 14 cell
clusters isolated from knee joints of Sham, DMM and DMM + denosumab mouse
single-cell transcriptomes. C Percentage of each cell type within knee joints among
Sham, DMM and DMM + denosumab mice based on the UMAP distribution.
D Number and strength of intercellular communication among the FLS, chon-
drocyte and macrophage cell populations in the indicated groups. The edge width
is proportional to the indicated number or strength of intercellular communica-
tion. E Western blot of MMP-13 and TNF-α in vehicle-, RANKL- and RANKL +
denosumab-treated FLSs (n = 3, biological replicates). F Western blotting of Col2a1
and Col10a1 in chondrocytes incubated with conditioned medium collected from
FLSs treated with RANKL or RANKL + denosumab (n = 3, biological replicates).
G Western blotting of Arg1 and CD86 in macrophages incubated with conditioned
medium collected from FLSs treated with RANKL or RANKL + denosumab (n = 3,
biological replicates). H Safranin O/Fast green staining of knee joints in all groups at
4 weeks after RANKL or RANKL + denosumab injection. Scale bar = 200 μm. I The
OA severity of the knee joints was evaluated using the OARSI score (n = 6, biological
replicates). J Representative H&E staining images showing the inﬁltration of
inﬂammatory cells and thickness of the synovium (dashed lines) in the indicated
group at week 4. Magniﬁed images of the boxed areas are shown in the panel below.
Scale bar = 500 μm (upper image); 100 μm (lower image). K Quantiﬁcation of
synovitis score (n = 6, biological replicates). Source data and P values are provided
in the Source Data ﬁle. Data are presented as median with interquartile range.
Statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test
(E–G, I, K). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
9
Fig. 5 | FSTL1 expression in FLSs was signiﬁcantly downregulated after deno-
sumab treatment in a DMM mouse model. A GO analysis of the DEGs in FLS
clusters, based on scRNA-seq. GO enrichment analysis was identiﬁed using a two-
sided hypergeometric test. P-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using
the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Terms with an
adjusted P-value (FDR) < 0.05 were considered statistically signiﬁcant. B Heatmap
depicting the DEGs in FLS clusters among the Sham, DMM and DMM + denosumab
groups, based on scRNA-seq. C Violin plots showing the expression levels of FSTL1
in each cell cluster among the Sham, DMM and DMM + denosumab groups. D Cells
are coloured in the UMAP map according to FSTL1 gene expression levels.
E Representative co-immunostaining of ColVI (red) and FSTL1 (green) in synovial
membrane of sham, DMM and DMM + denosumab mice, counterstained with DAPI
(blue). Scale bar = 50 μm. Representative images are from three independent
experiments.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
10
activated the TRAF6-mediated NF-κB signalling pathway and increased
the expression of FSTL1. Furthermore, denosumab, siTRAF6 or siFSTL1
all largely blocked the elevation of FSTL1 and activation of the TRAF6/
NF-κB pathway, thereby inhibiting the release of cartilage-damaging
and inﬂammatory mediators induced by RANKL. Thus, we identify
FSTL1 as an important downstream effector of the RANK/TRAF6/NF-κB
signalling pathway in OA progression.
In conclusion, in this study, we explored the effects and
mechanisms of denosumab in knee OA progression. Denosumab
could be a viable option for the treatment of OA as well as OP, and
FSTL1 is a potential therapeutic target for OA. We found that RANKL
is highly expressed in OA FLSs, which then produce degrading
enzymes and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines by activating the RANK/
TRAF6/FSTL1-mediated NF-κB pathway, inducing comprehensive
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
11
effects on the other components of the joint, and contributing to
cartilage degradation, synovial hyperplasia, subchondral sclerosis,
and OA pain. Denosumab, by targeting RANKL in FLSs, thus attenu-
ates OA progression (Fig. 8). However, tissue-speciﬁc knockout ani-
mal models, such as RANKL-speciﬁc deletion in FLSs using ColVI-Cre
RANKLﬂox/ﬂox or FSTL1-speciﬁc deletion in FLSs using ColVI-Cre
FSTL1ﬂox/ﬂox, are needed to further elucidate the actions of this path-
way and its role in cartilage destruction and synovial inﬂammation
during OA progression. Additionally, based on a randomised
placebo-controlled phase 2a trial on the treatment of hand OA with
denosumab27, we designed a single-centre prospective study on the
treatment of knee OA with denosumab, which is also a single-arm
trial. The patients screened were primarily those with degenerative
knee OA. While this increases the likelihood of observing targeted
therapeutic effects, it limits the generalisability of the results to knee
OA patients without inﬂammatory signs. Furthermore, due to the
long half-life of denosumab, which maintains its effect for over six
months, the follow-up period for this study was set at six months to
adequately observe the clinical efﬁcacy throughout the treatment
process. However, whether the symptoms of knee OA patients will
remain similarly improved after the blood concentration of deno-
sumab decreases beyond six months requires further long-term fol-
low-up studies. Another limitation of this study is the relatively small
sample size, so we opted for pairwise comparisons between time
points rather than longitudinal analysis, which introduces certain
limitations and may lead to potential biases. In addition, the study
population was mainly female (89%), reﬂecting the situation in the
wider patient population, because women are known to be more
susceptible than men to the onset and development of OA46. Addi-
tionally, compared to male OA patients, female patients often exhibit
higher levels of joint inﬂammation and clinical pain, and more severe
joint mobility problems47. While denosumab has historically been
used for the treatment of OP in postmenopausal women, it was
approved for use in male OP patients in 2023. Combined with our
animal data, which included only male mice, rats, and beagles, we
conclude that the efﬁcacy of denosumab is not sex speciﬁc. However,
a large-scale clinical trial recruiting more male patients is needed to
strengthen the evidence supporting the beneﬁcial and sex-speciﬁc
effects of denosumab in knee OA patents.
Methods
Animals
This study does not involve sex-based analysis and sex was not con-
sidered in study design, Therefore, in order to control variables, we
used only male mice in this study. Approximately one hundred male
C57BL/6 J mice at 12 weeks old, twelve male C57BL/6 J mice at
12 months old and eighteen male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (weight
200–225 g) were used as experimental animals, purchased from Beij-
ing SPF Biotechnology Co. Ltd. Animals were housed under standard
animal feeding conditions (22 ± 2 °C, 50 ± 10% humidity, 12-hour light/
dark cycle) with free access to a conventional rodent chow and auto-
claved water. For aging OA mouse models, 12-month-old male C57BL/
6 J mice were kept until 18 months of age. Twelve male dogs (beagles),
with a mean body weight of 10.0 ± 1.5kg, were purchased from Wuhan
Xinzhou Wanqianjiahe Experimental Animal Breeding Farm Co., Ltd.
and housed on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the Huazhong University of Science
and Technology Tongji Medical College Laboratory Animal Centre in
an open environment.
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
The levels of RANKL in the joint ﬂuid were measured using a Human
TRANCE/TNFSF11/RANKL ELISA Kit (Abclonal, RK00341) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol.
OA induction and treatment
DMM surgery was performed to create an OA mouse model in C57BL/
6 J male mice at 12 weeks of age48. Brieﬂy, mice were anesthetized with
pentobarbitalsodium (50 mg/kg), and a longitudinal skin incision was
made on the medial side of the right knee. The medial meniscal tibial
ligament was transected under a surgical microscope. Mice which
underwent the incision without meniscal tibial ligament transection
formed the sham group.
Rats were subjected to mono-iodoacetate (MIA; Sigma, MO, USA) to
induce OA49. Brieﬂy, rats were anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium
and received a single intra-articular injection of 3.0 mg/50 μL MIA (in
PBS) into the right knee joint using a 31 G insulin syringe. The control
group received an equal volume of 0.9% sterile saline into the left knee.
For the canine model, OA was induced by surgical anterior cruciate
ligament transection (ACLT)50. Under standard anaesthetic conditions,
the anterior cruciate ligament of the right knee joint was transected
using a pair of curved scissors and a sham operation was performed on
the left knee joint. Bleeding and soft tissue damage were minimised as
much as possible. After surgery, the synovium, fasciae, and skin were
each sutured in sequence. The contralateral knee served as an internal
control. The animals received analgesics and antibiotics during the ﬁrst
3 days after surgery. Starting 2 days after surgery, the dogs were allowed
out every day for 10 min on the patio for daily exercise.
Animals in the treatment group were injected subcutaneously
with denosumab (10 mg/kg/week). Meanwhile, animals in the
RANKL group were injected subcutaneously with sRANKL (1 mg/
kg). The sham group received an equivalent volume of vehicle. All
experimental mice were euthanised 4, 8 or 12 weeks after surgery
for further analysis.
OA pain analysis
Mouse knee pain was measured using von Frey ﬁbres at 0, 2, 4, and
8 weeks after DMM surgery. Before the test, each mouse was accli-
matised on an individual 4 × 3 × 7 cm metal grid (Shanghai Yuyan
Fig. 6 | TRAF6-mediated NF-κB signalling pathway and its downstream target
genes stimulated by RANKL were inhibited after denosumab treatment.
A KEGG pathway analysis of DEGs, based on scRNA-seq. KEGG pathway enrichment
was identiﬁed using a two-sided hypergeometric test. P-values were adjusted for
multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR)
correction. Terms with an adjusted P-value (FDR) < 0.05 were considered statisti-
cally signiﬁcant. B Western blot analysis of FSTL1, TRAF6, IκB, phosphorylated IκB,
p65 and p50 proteins in FLSs. Cells were stimulated with RANKL or RANKL +
denosumab for 24 h (n = 3, biological replicates). C Western blot analysis of p65 and
p50 proteins in the cytoplasm and nucleus of FLSs. Cells were stimulated with
RANKL or RANKL + denosumab for 24 h. Cyto, cytoplasm; Nuc, nucleus (n = 3,
biological replicates). D Representative co-immunoprecipitation analyses. Protein
lysates of FLSs were immunoprecipitated with anti-TRAF6 or non-speciﬁc (ns) IgG
after stimulation with RANKL, or RANKL + denosumab. The pulldown was subjected
to immunoblotting analysis against RANK of the coimmunoprecipitated protein
and equal amounts of the total protein lysates (input). Representative images are
from three independent experiments. E Western blot analysis of FSTL1, TRAF6, IκB,
phosphorylated IκB, p65 and p50 proteins in the indicated FLSs (n = 3, biological
replicates). F Western blot analysis of p65 and p50 proteins in the cytoplasm and
nucleus of indicated FLSs (n = 3, biological replicates). G Schematic diagram of
RANK/TRAF6/FSTL1-mediated NF-κB signalling regulated by RANKL. Created in
BioRender. Hu, Y. (2025) https://BioRender.com/vva2i57. H Representative immu-
noﬂuorescence images of p65 (green) and p50 (red) in the indicated FLSs. Blue:
DAPI showing total FLSs. Scale bar = 100 μm. Representative images are from three
independent experiments. I Western blotting analysis of ADAMTS5, MMP-13 and
TNF-α in the indicated FLSs (n = 3, biological replicates). Source data and P values
are provided in the Source Data ﬁle. Data are presented asmedian with interquartile
range. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post
hoc test for multiple comparisons (B, C, E, F). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001,
****P < 0.0001.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
12
Instrument Co., LTD., Shanghai, China) for 20 min. Von Frey ﬁbres
(Shanghai Yuyan Instrument Co., LTD.) in the range 0.008 to 300 g
were used for this assay. According to the “up-down method“51, the
plantar surface of the hind paw of each mouse was stimulated with
each ﬁbre until the ﬁbre bent for 3 s. X indicates a withdrawal response
and O indicates no response. The formula shows that the threshold
force causing paw contraction is expressed as the 50% paw contraction
threshold: (10[Xr + kδ])/10,000 (Xr = value of the last von Frey ﬁbre used
in the sequence (expressed in logarithmic units), k = table value, δ =
mean difference of forces between ﬁbres).
Open-ﬁeld test
Mice were tested in the open ﬁeld to measure their spontaneous
locomotor activity and anxiety-like behaviours. Brieﬂy, each mouse
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
13
was gently put into an open ﬁeld box (50 × 50 × 50 cm3), the bottom of
the box was mapped by the system. The mice were placed in the
central area, habituated to the experimental environment for 30 min
before the test and then allowed to move freely for 5 min. Afterwards,
the total distance travelled, walking speed, and time duration in the
central area were recorded and calculated.
Micro-CT analysis
Mouse knee joints were harvested at 8 weeks after DMM surgery and
ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 48 h. Micro-CT analyses were
performed using a high-resolution micro-CT scanner (Bruker SkyScan
1176, Karlsruhe, Germany) at 9 μm resolution, with a 1 mm aluminium
ﬁlter, 90 kV voltage, and 273 μA current. NRecon reconstruction
software and CT-VOX 3D reconstruction analysis software provided by
SkyScan were used for volumetric reconstruction and 3D image gen-
eration. The grade of OA progression was analysed based on the micro-
CT images52.
Histology and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
After performing micro-CT scanning, knee joints were immersed in 4%
PFA overnight, decalciﬁed with 10% EDTA for 4 weeks, and then
embedded in parafﬁn. After embedding, the specimens were sectioned
at a thickness of 7 μm from the medial side to the cruciate ligament
junction. Safranin O/fast green, H&E and TRAP staining were per-
formed. The Mankin Score or OARSI score was used to evaluate the
severity and progression of OA after safranin-O staining53. Factors
affecting synovitis score included thickening of the entire synovial
membrane, activation of resident cells/synovial stroma and aggrega-
tion of inﬂammatory cells, revealed by H&E staining54. For IHC staining,
slides were incubated with primary antibodies: anti-RANK (1:100,
Abclonal, A13382), anti-RANKL (1:100, Proteintech, 23408-1-AP), anti-
Col2a1
(1:100,
Abcam,
ab34712),
anti-Aggrecan
(1:100,
Abcam,
ab315486),
anti-MMP-13
(1:100,
Proteintech,
18165-1-AP),
anti-
ADAMTS-5 (1:100, Boster, A02802-1), anti-FSTL1 (1:100, Proteintech,
20182-1-AP), anti-GDF5 (1:100, Abclonal, A13167). After rinsing twice,
Fig. 7 | Denosumab also attenuated synovitis in a canine model. A Schematic
illustration of the surgery and treatment plan in the ACLT-induced OA canine
model. Created in BioRender. Hu, Y. (2025) https://BioRender.com/pbs6sij.
B Representative macroscopic images of anterior views of the knee joint isolated
from the indicated dog groups at 2 months after ACLT surgery. Yellow arrows
indicate articular cartilage damage. Macroscopic cartilage scoring was quantiﬁed
based on the OARSI scoring system (n = 6, biological replicates). C Representative
MRI images of knee joints at 2 months after ACLT surgery in the indicated beagle
dogs. Red arrows indicate the effusion of joint cavity and suprapatellar bursa. SAG,
the sagittal MRI view of the knee joint. TRA, the transverse axis MRI view of the knee
joint. D The medial articular cartilage thickness and effusion-synovitis score were
quantiﬁed using MRI images (n = 6, biological replicates). E Representative Safranin
O/Fast green staining of tibial plateau and H&E staining of synovium among Sham,
ACLT and ACLT + denosumab dog groups. Magniﬁed images of the boxed areas are
shown in the panelbelow. Scale bar = 500 μm (upper image); 100 μm (lower image).
F Mankin score, OARSI score, and Synovitis score were quantiﬁed (n = 6, biological
replicates). Source data and P values are provided in the Source Data ﬁle. Data are
presented as median with interquartile range. Statistical analysis was performed
using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple comparisons (B, D,F).
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001.
Fig. 8 | Schematic representation of the mechanism via which denosumab attenuates OA progression by inhibiting RANK/TRAF6/FSTL1 signalling in FLSs. FLSs
ﬁbroblast-like synoviocytes. CHO chondrocytes.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
14
sections were incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies and
photographed under an optical microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan;
IX73P1 F).
Immunoﬂuorescence
For immunoﬂuorescent staining, frozen sections were rewarmed to
room temperature, permeabilized with 3‰Triton X-100 at room
temperature for 15 minutes, then blocked in 5% bovine serum. After
rinsing, slides were incubated with primary antibodies against RANKL
(1:100, Proteintech, 23408-1-AP), RANK (1:100, Abclonal, A13382), or
ColVI (1:100, Proteintech, 17023-1-AP) overnight at 4°C, then sections
were labelled with secondary antibody for 1 h in the dark, and coun-
terstained with DAPI for 10 min and then imaged under a confocal
microscope (Nikon A1).
Cells cultured on slides were ﬁxed with 4% PFA for 20 min at room
temperature then incubated with a primary antibody against p50
(1:100, Proteintech, 14220-1-AP) or p65 (1:100, Proteintech, 10745-1-
AP), CD86 (1:100, Proteintech, 13395-1-AP) or Arg1 (1:100, Afﬁnity
Biosciences, DF6657), overnight at 4 °C. The next day, the cells were
incubated with a ﬂuorophore-conjugated secondary antibody for 1h.
Cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI for 10 min in the dark.
Images were acquired under a confocal microscope (Nikon A1).
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq)
Articular tissues of mice in the sham, DMM and DMM + denosumab
treatment groups were isolated and dissociated into single cell sus-
pensions with 100 μg/mL of the enzyme mixture Liberase™(Sigma-
Aldrich) and 100 μg/mL DNase I (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA,
USA)55. Brieﬂy, a single-cell RNA-Seq library kit v3 was used for cDNA
ampliﬁcation and chromium library construction (10 × Genomics,
Pleasanton, CA, USA). cDNA libraries were sequenced on an Illumina
NovaSeq 6,000 (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) with a reading
length of 150 bp by the Wuhan Biobank Co. Ltd. The R package Seurat
(Version 3.0.2) was used to perform data analysis56. Brieﬂy, a single-cell
suspension of 1.8 × 104 cells was examined and ﬁltered (nFeature
6,000, nCount 10,000, percent_mt 0.25) for downstream analysis.
Cells were visualised using the Uniform Manifold Approximation and
Projection (UMAP). Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were
deﬁned by a P value threshold < 0.05 and log FC > 0.25.
mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq)
Total RNA was isolated from mouse FLSs of Veh, RANKL and RANKL +
denosumab treatment groups using Trizol (TaKaRa Bio) and evaluated
using an Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,
CA, USA). An RNA sequencing library was prepared and sequenced by
CapitalBio Technology (Beijing, China). The DESeq2 package was used
to identify DEGs between groups, and the threshold of adjusted P value
was 0.05. Gene ontology (GO) analysis, and Kyoto encyclopaedia of
genes and genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis for DEGs were
visualized and analysed using the DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.8.
Cell isolation, treatment and transfection
FLSs were harvested from 8-week-old mouse knee joints. After eutha-
nising mice, the synovium tissue was dissected and digested in 0.25%
trypsin for 30 min, followed by digestion with 0.2% collagenase Type 2
for 6 h57. Then cells were centrifuged and ﬁltered, plated into T25 ﬂasks
and cultured with Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium (DMEM, Gibco,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco),
and supplemented with penicillin (100 U/ mL) and streptomycin
(100 g/mL).
Chondrocytes were harvested from the knee joint articular carti-
lage of 3-day-old mice. Cartilage samples were harvested, cut up into
pieces using a sterile scalpel under a dissection microscope and
digested in 0.25% trypsin for 30 min. Then the pieces of cartilage were
further digested with 900 U/mL collagenase Type I for 2 h. Dissociated
cells were centrifuged and resuspended in DMEM containing 10% FBS,
penicillin (100 U/ mL) and streptomycin (100 g/mL).
For chondrogenesis, 4.0 × 105 chondrocytes were centrifuged into
pellets and then cultured in chondrogenic medium (high-glucose
DMEM containing 40 mg/mL L-proline, 0.1 mM dexamethasone, 1%
penicillin/ streptomycin, 100 mg/mL sodium pyruvate, 50 mg/mL
ascorbate-2-phosphate, 1% ITSp Premix). Before chondrogenic induc-
tion, 10 ng/mL TGF-β1 (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) was freshly
added to the differentiation medium, which was changed every 3 days.
After culturing for 2 weeks, the cell pellets were ﬁxed in 4% PFA and
then embedded in parafﬁn. To evaluate collagen deposition, parafﬁn
sections were stained with alcian blue.
FLSs were cultured in a 6-well plate at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well,
then transfected with TRAF6 siRNA (siTRAF6) or FSTL1 siRNA (siFSTL1)
sequences (GenePharma Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) using Lipofecta-
mine 3000 Transfection Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham,
MA, USA). After transfection for 36 h, the culture medium was chan-
ged, and the cells were treated with RANKL (50 ng/mL) or denosumab
(1 μg/mL) for 24 h.
Conditioned medium
FLSs were seeded into a 6-well plate and incubated with RANKL or
RANKL + denosumab for 24 h. The next day, the cells were washed
three times with PBS, and the culture medium was changed to serum-
free DMEM. After another 24 h, the conditioned medium was collected
for further experiments.
Migration assay
To evaluate migration, 1 × 104 RAW 264.7 macrophages (American
Type Culture Collection, TIB-71, Manassas, VA, USA) in 150 μL growth
medium were plated into the upper chamber of a 24-well Transwell™
plate. RANKL-CM or RANKL + denosumab-CM was added to the lower
chamber. After incubating for 12 h, cells in the upper chamber were
removed using a swab and cells on the bottom surface of each
Transwell™were ﬁxed with 4% PFA and stained with crystal violet. The
number of macrophages that had migrated was observed and quan-
tiﬁed under a microscope.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
Total RNA was isolated from cells or tissues using Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and cDNA was
reverse transcribed using a reverse transcription kit (TaKaRa Bio). TB
Green Premix Ex Taq II (TaKaRa Bio) was used for RT-PCR detection.
Expression levels were normalised to GAPDH which was used as the
internal reference. All primer sequences for RT-PCR are listed in Sup-
plementary Table 1.
Western blotting and co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)
Total protein was harvested from cells or tissues using RIPA lysis buffer
(Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology) supplemented with phospha-
tase and proteinase inhibitors, and the concentration was determined
by the BCA assay (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology). Proteins were
subjected to sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electro-
phoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred onto a 0.45 μm polyvinylidene
diﬂuoride membrane. The membrane was then incubated overnight at
4 °C with the following primary antibodies against the following pro-
teins: RANK (1:1,000, Abclonal, A13382), RANKL (1:1,000, Proteintech,
23408-1-AP), MMP-13 (1:1,000, Proteintech, 18165-1-AP), ADAMTS-5
(1:1,000, Boster, A02802-1), Col2a1 (1:1,000, Bioss, bs-0709R), Col10a1
(1:1,000, Abcam, ab182563), TNF-α (1:1,000, Abclonal, A11534), IL-1β
(1:1,000, Afﬁnity Biosciences, AF5103), CD86 (1:1,000, Proteintech,
13395-1-AP), Arg1 (1:1,000, Afﬁnity Biosciences, DF6657), FSTL1
(1:1,000, Proteintech, 20182-1-AP), TRAF6 (1:1,000, Santa Cruz,
sc8409), IκB-α (1:2,000, Proteintech, 10268-1-AP), p-IκB-α (1:1000,
CST, 2859 T), p-65 (1:1,000, Proteintech, 10745-1-AP), p-50 (1:1,000,
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
15
Proteintech, 14220-1-AP) and H3 (1:1,000, ab32356, Abcam); GAPDH
(1:3,000, Proteintech, 60004-1-Ig) was used as the internal reference.
After washing with TBS containing 0.01% Tween 20 (TBST) three times,
HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were added and incubated for
1 h at room temperature. Signals on the membrane were visualized
using ECL chemiluminescence.
For immunoprecipitation, cell lysate was precipitated with 5 μL of
anti-TRAF6 antibody (Santa Cruz, sc8409) or control IgG for 24 h using
magnetic beads. Then the immune complexes were separated by
magnetic adsorption and washed twice with PBS. Finally, the immune
complexes were boiled for further western blot assays to detect the
expression of RANK.
Clinical study design and collection of human synovium samples
The clinical study was performed between August 2021 and December
2025 in Wuhan Union Hospital. The protocol was registered on the
Chinese
Clinical
Trial
Registry
(www.chictr.org.cn,
number
ChiCTR2200060412), and ClinicalTrials.gov (identiﬁer: NCT06357741)
and was approved prior to patient recruitment by the Institutional
Review Board according to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. All
patients included in this study signed a written informed consent form
and volunteered for the collection and use of their tissue samples
(cartilage, synovium, and synovial ﬂuid) in scientiﬁc research. In
addition, publication of any potentially identiﬁable images or data, as
approved by the Ethics Committee of Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (Ethical
approval number: 2025-0423). It was designed as a 3 + 3 single-arm
Phase I study to evaluate the safety and efﬁcacy of denosumab injec-
tion in knee OA patients with OP. This study does not involve sex-based
analysis and sex was not considered in the study design. Therefore, for
human participants, we did not assign a particular sex. Nine patients
were enroled and followed up over three distinct study visits of 1, 3 and
6 months after systemic denosumab injection. The demographic
characteristics and clinical status of these patients are listed in Sup-
plementary Table 2. Fifty-six percent of the patients had a high BMI.
Human synovium samples were collected from patients with knee
OA who received total knee replacement at the Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College (Wuhan, China) (Supplementary Table 3). We
obtained informed consent from all participants in this study, and the
tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki were followed throughout.
Outcomes
The primary outcome was the 10-point visual analogue scale (VAS) for
knee pain and the Oxford Knee Score (OKS) for knee function. The
secondary outcome was the WOMAC for knee function and the rate of
adverse events (AEs). WOMAC consists of three sub scores, pain,
comprising ﬁve items; stiffness, with two items; and functionality, with
17 items. AEs were recorded at each follow-up and described in terms
of symptoms, incidence, severity, and relatedness according to the
World Health Organization-Uppsala Monitoring Centre causality
assessment system58. The severity of AEs was divided into ﬁve levels
according to the National Cancer Institute-Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI-CTCAE)59. No serious adverse events
(AEs), or cases of permanent disability, septic arthritis, or neoplasia
were reported at any of the follow-up visits. All AEs were mild and no
patients discontinued the trial due to AEs (Supplementary Table 4).
Radiologic outcomes were analysed by magnetic resonance ima-
ging (MRI) according to the MRI Osteoarthritis Knee Score (MOAKS),
which is a validated semi-quantitative tool to describe OA progression
over time60. Thus, the knee is divided into 14 subregional divisions
(tibia–medial and lateral, anterior/central/posterior; femoral–medial
and lateral, trochlea/central/posterior; patella–medial and lateral) with
each region achieving a corresponding score for features of OA. The
features assessed in this study were articular cartilage, synovitis and
bone marrow lesions (BMLs). All data were collected at intervals of
baseline, 1, 3 and 6-months follow-up by an orthopaedic physician with
no knowledge of the treatment group.
Statistical analysis
Each experiment was repeated at least three times and only data from a
representative experiment are presented. Data are represented as the
median with interquartile range and all statistical analyses and map-
ping were performed using GraphPad Prism 8 software (GraphPad
Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). We employed unpaired two-tailed t-
test or two-tailed Mann–Whitney U test for statistical analysis between
two groups and one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test or
Kruskal–Wallis test with Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple compar-
isons. n indicates the number of biologically independent samples,
animals per group, or human specimens. Values of P < 0.05 were
considered signiﬁcant.
Ethics approval
All animal study designs were reviewed and approved by the Animal
Care and Ethics Committee of Huazhong University of Science and
Technology (Ethical approval number: 3852).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Source data of all ﬁgures and RNA-seq data of this study are provided
in the Source Data File. The scRNA-seq data of this study are provided
and accessible through National Genomics Data Center (https://ngdc.
cncb.ac.cn/omix/release/OMIX011832). The study protocol and the
information of the volunteers enrolled in the clinical trial are available
within the article and its supplementary ﬁles. Any additional requests
for information can be directed to, and will be fulﬁlled by the corre-
sponding authors. Source data are provided with this paper.
References
1.
Glyn-Jones, S. et al. Osteoarthritis. Lancet 386, 376–387 (2015).
2.
Yao, Q. et al. Osteoarthritis: pathogenic signaling pathways and
therapeutic targets. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 8, 56 (2023).
3.
Weinans, H. et al. Pathophysiology of peri-articular bone changes in
osteoarthritis. Bone 51, 190–196 (2012).
4.
Scanzello, C. R. & Goldring, S. R. The role of synovitis in osteoar-
thritis pathogenesis. Bone 51, 249–257 (2012).
5.
Cho, Y. et al. Disease-modifying therapeutic strategies in osteoar-
thritis: current status and future directions. Exp. Mol. Med. 53,
1689–1696 (2021).
6.
Kaneko, H. et al. Synovial perlecan is required for osteophyte for-
mation in knee osteoarthritis. Matrix Biol. 32, 178–187 (2013).
7.
Malfait, A. M. & Schnitzer, T. J. Towards a mechanism-based
approach to pain management in osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheu-
matol. 9, 654–664 (2013).
8.
Mathiessen, A. & Conaghan, P. G. Synovitis in osteoarthritis: current
understanding with therapeutic implications. Arthritis Res Ther. 19,
18 (2017).
9.
Sellam, J. & Berenbaum, F. The role of synovitis in pathophysiology
and clinical symptoms of osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 6,
625–635 (2010).
10.
Hasegawa, T. et al. Identiﬁcation of a novel arthritis-associated
osteoclast precursor macrophage regulated by FoxM1. Nat.
Immunol. 20, 1631–1643 (2019).
11.
Bartok, B. & Firestein, G. S. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes: key effector
cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Immunol. Rev. 233, 233–255 (2010).
12.
Liao, L. et al. Acute Synovitis after trauma precedes and is asso-
ciated with osteoarthritis onset and progression. Int J. Biol. Sci. 16,
970–980 (2020).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
16
13.
Lacey, D. L. et al. Bench to bedside: elucidation of the OPG-RANK-
RANKL pathway and the development of denosumab. Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov. 11, 401–419 (2012).
14.
Shangguan, L., Ding, M., Wang, Y., Xu, H. & Liao, B. Denosumab
ameliorates osteoarthritis by protecting cartilage against degrada-
tion and modulating subchondral bone remodeling. Regenerative
Ther. 27, 181–190 (2024).
15.
Bendele, A. M. Animal models of osteoarthritis. J. Musculoskelet.
neuronal Interact. 1, 363–376 (2001).
16.
Waltereit-Kracke, V. et al. Deletion of activin A in mesenchymal but
not myeloid cells ameliorates disease severity in experimental
arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 81, 1106–1118 (2022).
17.
van der Kraan, P. M. & van den Berg, W. B. Osteophytes: relevance
and biology. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 15, 237–244 (2007).
18.
Roelofs, A. J. et al. Joint morphogenetic cells in the adult mam-
malian synovium. Nat. Commun. 8, 15040 (2017).
19.
Roelofs, A. J. et al. Identiﬁcation of the skeletal progenitor cells
forming osteophytes in osteoarthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 79,
1625–1634 (2020).
20. Schäfer, N. & Grässel, S. Targeted therapy for osteoarthritis: pro-
gress and pitfalls. Nat. Med. 28, 2473–2475 (2022).
21.
Wang, Y. et al. Follistatin-like protein 1: a serum biochemical marker
reﬂecting the severity of joint damage in patients with osteoar-
thritis. Arthritis Res Ther. 13, R193 (2011).
22. Ni, S. et al. The involvement of follistatin-like protein 1 in osteoar-
thritis by elevating NF-kappaB-mediated inﬂammatory cytokines
and enhancing ﬁbroblast like synoviocyte proliferation. Arthritis Res
Ther. 17, 91 (2015).
23. Napetschnig, J. & Wu, H. Molecular basis of NF-kappaB signaling.
Annu Rev. Biophys. 42, 443–468 (2013).
24. Rigoglou, S. & Papavassiliou, A. G. The NF-kappaB signalling path-
way in osteoarthritis. Int. J. Biochem. cell Biol. 45,
2580–2584 (2013).
25. Deng, R. et al. Chondrocyte membrane-coated nanoparticles pro-
mote drug retention and halt cartilage damage in rat and canine
osteoarthritis. Sci. Transl. Med. 16, eadh9751 (2024).
26. Cook, J. L. et al. The OARSI histopathology initiative – recommen-
dations for histological assessments of osteoarthritis in the dog.
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 18, S66–S79 (2010).
27.
Wittoek, R., Verbruggen, G., Vanhaverbeke, T., Colman, R. & Ele-
waut, D. RANKL blockade for erosive hand osteoarthritis: a rando-
mized placebo-controlled phase 2a trial. Nat. Med. 30,
829–836 (2024).
28. Loeser, R. F., Collins, J. A. & Diekman, B. O. Ageing and the patho-
genesis of osteoarthritis. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 12, 412–420 (2016).
29. Zhen, G. et al. Inhibition of TGF-β signaling in mesenchymal stem
cells of subchondral bone attenuates osteoarthritis. Nat. Med. 19,
704–712 (2013).
30. Komatsu, N. & Takayanagi, H. Mechanisms of joint destruction in
rheumatoid arthritis - immune cell-ﬁbroblast-bone interactions.
Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 18, 415–429 (2022).
31.
Takayanagi, H. Osteoimmunology: shared mechanisms and cross-
talk between the immune and bone systems. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7,
292–304 (2007).
32. Croft, A. P. et al. Distinct ﬁbroblast subsets drive inﬂammation and
damage in arthritis. Nature 570, 246–251 (2019).
33. Kadri, A. et al. Inhibition of bone resorption blunts osteoarthritis in
mice with high bone remodelling. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 69,
1533–1538 (2010).
34. Jones, M. D. et al. In vivo microfocal computed tomography and
micro-magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of antiresorptive
and antiinﬂammatory drugs as preventive treatments of osteoar-
thritis in the rat. Arthritis rheumatism 62, 2726–2735 (2010).
35. Strassle, B. W. et al. Inhibition of osteoclasts prevents cartilage loss
and pain in a rat model of degenerative joint disease. Osteoarthr.
Cartil. 18, 1319–1328 (2010).
36. Bingham, C. O. 3rd et al. Risedronate decreases biochemical mar-
kers of cartilage degradation but does not decrease symptoms or
slow radiographic progression in patients with medial compart-
ment osteoarthritis of the knee: results of the two-year multinational
knee osteoarthritis structural arthritis study. Arthritis rheumatism
54, 3494–3507 (2006).
37. Garnero, P. et al. Relationships between biochemical markers of
bone and cartilage degradation with radiological progression in
patients with knee osteoarthritis receiving risedronate: the Knee
Osteoarthritis Structural Arthritis randomized clinical trial.
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 16, 660–666 (2008).
38. McClung, M. R. et al. Denosumab in postmenopausal women with
low bone mineral density. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 821–831 (2006).
39. Ferrari, S. & Langdahl, B. Mechanisms underlying the long-term and
withdrawal effects of denosumab therapy on bone. Nat. Rev.
Rheumatol. 19, 307–317 (2023).
40. Lv, Z. et al. Molecular classiﬁcation of knee osteoarthritis. Front. cell
developmental Biol. 9, 725568 (2021).
41.
Shibanuma, M., Mashimo, J., Mita, A., Kuroki, T. & Nose, K. Cloning
from a mouse osteoblastic cell line of a set of transforming-growth-
factor-beta 1-regulated genes, one of which seems to encode a
follistatin-related polypeptide. Eur. J. Biochem. 217, 13–19 (1993).
42. Sundaram, G. M. et al. See-saw’ expression of microRNA-198 and
FSTL1 from a single transcript in wound healing. Nature 495,
103–106 (2013).
43. Chaly, Y., Marinov, A. D., Oxburgh, L., Bushnell, D. S. & Hirsch, R.
FSTL1 promotes arthritis in mice by enhancing inﬂammatory cyto-
kine/chemokine expression. Arthritis rheumatism 64,
1082–1088 (2012).
44. Chaly, Y. et al. Follistatin-like protein 1 regulates chondrocyte pro-
liferation and chondrogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem
cells. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 74, 1467–1473 (2015).
45. Hu, P. F., Ma, C. Y., Sun, F. F., Chen, W. P. & Wu, L. D. Follistatin-like
protein 1 (FSTL1) promotes chondrocyte expression of matrix
metalloproteinase and inﬂammatory factors via the NF-κB pathway.
J. Cell. Mol. Med. 23, 2230–2237 (2019).
46. Prieto-Alhambra, D. et al. Incidence and risk factors for clinically
diagnosed knee, hip and hand osteoarthritis: inﬂuences of age,
gender and osteoarthritis affecting other joints. Ann. Rheum. Dis.
73, 1659–1664 (2014).
47. Boer, C. G. et al. Deciphering osteoarthritis genetics across 826,690
individuals from 9 populations. Cell 184, 4784–4818.e4717 (2021).
48. Glasson, S. S., Blanchet, T. J. & Morris, E. A. The surgical destabili-
zation of the medial meniscus (DMM) model of osteoarthritis in the
129/SvEv mouse. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 15, 1061–1069 (2007).
49. Park, E. H. et al. TissueGene-C induces long-term analgesic effects
through regulation of pain mediators and neuronal sensitization in a
rat monoiodoacetate-induced model of osteoarthritis pain.
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 31, 1567–1580 (2023).
50. Marijnissen, A. C., van Roermund, P. M., TeKoppele, J. M., Bijlsma, J.
W. & Lafeber, F. P. The canine ‘groove’ model, compared with the
ACLT model of osteoarthritis. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 10, 145–155 (2002).
51.
Chaplan, S. R., Bach, F. W., Pogrel, J. W., Chung, J. M. & Yaksh, T. L.
Quantitative assessment of tactile allodynia in the rat paw. J. Neu-
rosci. methods 53, 55–63 (1994).
52. Chan, W. P. et al. Osteoarthritis of the knee: comparison of radio-
graphy, CT, and MR imaging to assess extent and severity. Ajr. Am.
J. Roentgenol. 157, 799–806 (1991).
53. Pritzker, K. P. et al. Osteoarthritis cartilage histopathology: grading
and staging. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 14, 13–29 (2006).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
17
54. Krenn, V. et al. Grading of chronic synovitis–a histopathological
grading system for molecular and diagnostic pathology. Pathol.,
Res. Pract. 198, 317–325 (2002).
55. Zhang, F. et al. Deﬁning inﬂammatory cell states in rheumatoid
arthritis joint synovial tissues by integrating single-cell tran-
scriptomics and mass cytometry. Nat. Immunol. 20,
928–942 (2019).
56. Satija, R., Farrell, J. A., Gennert, D., Schier, A. F. & Regev, A. Spatial
reconstruction of single-cell gene expression data. Nat. Biotechnol.
33, 495–502 (2015).
57. Futami, I. et al. Isolation and characterization of multipotential
mesenchymal cells from the mouse synovium. PloS one 7,
e45517 (2012).
58. Mouton, J. P., Mehta, U., Rossiter, D. P., Maartens, G. & Cohen, K.
Interrater agreement of two adverse drug reaction causality
assessment methods: A randomised comparison of the Liverpool
Adverse Drug Reaction Causality Assessment Tool and the World
Health Organization-Uppsala Monitoring Centre system. PloS one
12, e0172830 (2017).
59. Basch, E. et al. Patient versus clinician symptom reporting using the
National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for
Adverse Events: results of a questionnaire-based study. Lancet
Oncol. 7, 903–909 (2006).
60. Hunter, D. J. et al. Evolution of semi-quantitative whole joint
assessment of knee OA: MOAKS (MRI Osteoarthritis Knee Score).
Osteoarthr. Cartil. 19, 990–1002 (2011).
Acknowledgements
We extend our gratitude to all patients who participated in this trial. We
thank Ling Qin (University of Pennsylvania) and Xianrong Zhang
(Southern Medical University) for thoughtful discussion; Ke Zhang for
technical assistance; Qi Wang (School of Public Health, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology) for statistical
analysis. This work was supported by funds from the Department of
Science and Technology of Hubei Province (No. 2023BCB089) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82372465 to W.T., No.
82402818 to W.L., No. 81672235 to H.T., No. 82002300 to Z.D.).
Author contributions
W.T. and H.T. designed and supervised the project and revised the
manuscript. Y.H. and C.M. performed the experiments and wrote the
manuscript. W.C. and S.L. analysed and interpreted data. D.X., H.X., and
H.L. collected the clinical data. D.S., W.L., Z.D., J.W., Z.H., W.X., Z.S. and
Y.L. veriﬁed the underlying data. All authors reviewed and approved the
ﬁnal document.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Hongtao Tian or Wei Tong.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. A
peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence toshare adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-66202-z
Nature Communications|   (2025) 16:11394 
18
