The Journal of EVIDENCE-BASED DENTAL PRACTICE 
REVIEW ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION—DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT/PROGNOSIS 
INTRA-ARTICULAR PHARMACOLOGICAL 
INJECTIONS FOR TEMPOROMANDIBULAR 
JOINT OSTEOARTHRITIS ARE 
COMPARABLE TO PLACEBO 
PURPOSE/QUESTION In adult patients with temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis (TMJ OA), is the intra-articular injection 
of either corticosteroids (CCS), hyaluronic acid (HA), platelet-rich plasma (PRP), or placebo effective in reducing joint pain? 
REVIEWER 
ELLIOT ABT 
Adjunct Associate Professor, Department of Oral Medicine, University of Illinois College of Dentistry, Chicago, IL 
Article Title and Bibliographic Information 
Effectiveness of intra-articular injections of sodium hyaluronate, corticosteroids, 
platelet-rich plasma on temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis: a systematic re- 
view and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Xie Y, Zhao K, 
Ye G, Yao X, Yu M, Ouyang H. J Evid Based Dent Pract. 2022 Sep;22(3):101720. 
doi:10.1016/j.jebdp.2022.101720. 
SOURCE OF FUNDING 
National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (nos. T2121004 , 81630065 ). 
TYPE OF STUDY/DESIGN 
Systematic review with network meta- 
analysis of data. 
KEYWORDS 
Temporomandibular disorders, 
Osteoarthritis, Sodium hyaluronate, 
Platelet-rich plasma, Corticosteroids 
J Evid Base Dent Pract 2024: [101985] 
1532-3382/$36.00 
© 2024 Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved. 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jebdp.2024.101985 
SUMMARY 
Subjects or Study Selection 
PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled trials were 
searched for randomized controlled trials on therapies for temporomandibular 
joint osteoarthritis. The gray literature was searched via ClinicalTrials.gov. Refer- 
ence lists of reviews were also manually scanned. Two reviewers independently 
assessed the risk of bias using the dimensions of quality in randomized controlled 
trials. 
Key Study Factor 
Included studies compared various combinations of intra-articular injections of 
either corticosteroids (CCS), sodium hyaluronate (HA), plate-rich plasma (PRP), 
or placebo for temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis (TMJ OA). 
Main Outcome Measure 
The main outcome was pain on a visual analog scale (VAS) 1-10 after short-term 
(3-6 months) or long-term ( > 12 months) follow-up. Scales from 0 to 100 were 
converted to a 0-10 scale. 
Main Results 
Pain was reported as a mean difference with 95% CI. The bulk of results were not 
statistically significant with one notable exception: for short-term pain reduction, 
injection of CCS was significantly worse than placebo (MD = 1.73; 95% CI 0.37- 
3.09). The abstract reported PRP vs placebo as MD = −0.23 (95% CI −2.49 to 
2.04), one of the many nonsignificant results. 
June 2024 
1 
The Journal of EVIDENCE-BASED DENTAL PRACTICE 
Conclusions 
Intra-articular injections of either CCS, HA, or PRP for TMJ 
OA had no effect on improving pain reduction compared 
with placebo. 
COMMENTARY AND ANALYSIS 
The American Academy of Orofacial Pain (AAOP) defines 
TMDs as a group of musculoskeletal and neuromuscular con- 
ditions that involve the temporomandibular joints, the mas- 
ticatory muscles, and all associated tissues. 1 Thus, TMDs en- 
compass a number of different diagnoses and are a major 
source of non-dental pain and/or dysfunction in the orofa- 
cial region. 2 - 4 TMDs are generally acute, but can become 
chronic resulting in significant morbidity and quality of life 
issues. There are now several clinical practice guidelines on 
the management of temporomandibular disorders and they 
resonate with each other in that many TMDs have sponta- 
neous remissions amenable to conservative, reversible ther- 
apies. Conservative therapies would include the use of anal- 
gesics, heat application, and physical therapy. A recent re- 
port by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine (NASEM) noted a number of deficiencies re- 
garding the education of TMDs leading to inconsistencies 
with both diagnosis and treatment. 5 While TMJ OA has been 
treated by intra-articular injections of various pharmaceuti- 
cals, studies on the effectiveness of these medications ver- 
sus placebo (Ringer’s Lactated Solution) have been lacking. 
Thus, this network meta-analysis is clinically relevant. An- 
other important finding is the lack of statistical significance 
of these injectables as compared with placebo. However, 
it must be noted that the 9 included studies involving 316 
patients were all generally small, with only 1 study having 
102 patients. This large included study showed that CCS 
injections were significantly worse than placebo. Generally, 
we have non-significant results with multiple underpowered 
studies which leaves the effectiveness of intra-articular injec- 
tions with a degree of uncertainty. That is, with additional 
studies hopefully having larger samples, would summary es- 
timates move away from the null and show a benefit to these 
therapies, or might they simply confirm that there is no ef- 
fect? Either way, additional studies should narrow confidence 
intervals providing stronger evidence to answer this impor- 
tant question. In addition to the imprecision (ie, a wider con- 
fidence intervals) of results due to small samples, there was 
also considerable inconsistency (heterogeneity) with some 
results on opposite side of the null value. 
Methodologically, this was a very well-conducted network 
meta-analysis (MA), and the authors are to be commended 
on this work. A network meta-analysis has the direct compar- 
isons of traditional MA, and also allows for indirect compar- 
isons not done in the included studies, especially enabling 
comparisons with placebo injections. 
In addition to multiple small studies, some of the included 
studies were at unclear risk of bias, emphasizing the need 
for larger, high-quality randomized trials to help answer this 
important clinical question. Therefore, clinicians may want 
to use caution with intra-articular injections for TMJ OA as 
the current best evidence fails to show a benefit of various 
injectables as compared with placebo. 
REFERENCES 
1. De Leeuw R, Klasser GD. Orofacial Pain: Guidelines for As- 
sessment, Diagnosis, and Management . 6th ed. Chicago, IL: 
Quintessence Publishing; 2018 . 
2. Klasser DG, Abt E, Weyant RJ, Greene CS. Temporomandibu- 
lar disorders: current status of research, education, policies, 
and its impact on clinicians in the United States of America. 
Quintessence Int . 2023;54(4):328–334 . 
3. Okeson JP. Bell’s Oral and Facial Pain . 7th ed. Hanover Park, IL: 
Quintessence Publishing; 2014 . 
4. Greene CS. Managing the care of patients with temporo- 
mandibular disorders: a new guideline for care. JADA . 
2010;141:1086–1088 . 
5. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
Temporomandibular Disorders: Priorities for Research and Care . 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2020 . 
REVIEWER 
ELLIOT ABT, DDS, MS, MSC, 
Adjunct Associate Professor Dept. of Oral Medicine U. of Illi- 
nois College of Dentistry, eabt7@sbcglobal.net . 
2 
Volume 24, Number 2 
