Vol. XX • Issue X
Effects of High-Dose Capsaicin on TMD Subjects
1
© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2016
Epidemiologic Research
Abstract: Temporomandibular 
joint disorder (TMD) is a complex 
musculoskeletal disorder that 
presents with pain, limited jaw 
opening, and abnormal noises in the 
temporomandibular joint. Despite 
the significant impact that TMD has 
in terms of suffering and financial 
burden, relatively few new treatments 
have emerged; therefore, development 
of novel treatments to treat TMD 
pain remains a high priority. The 
rationale of this study was to use 
a double-blind, vehicle-controlled 
clinical trial to evaluate the effects of 
a high-concentration (8%) capsaicin 
cream on TMD. This is based on the 
hypothesis that targeting TRP vanilloid 
subfamily member 1 (TRPV1) for 
pain control may provide a novel 
method for pain relief in TMD patients. 
TRPV1 is primarily expressed on a 
population of nociceptive-specific 
neurons and provides a candidate 
target for the development of pain 
treatments. Capsaicin is the primary 
agonist for TRPV1 and has been used 
previously in relatively low doses 
(0.025% to 0.075%) as a therapeutic 
for a variety of pain disorders, 
including postherpetic neuralgia and 
osteoarthritis; however, analgesic 
efficacy remains equivocal. TMD and 
healthy control subjects were assigned 
to either an active capsaicin or vehicle 
control group. The treatments were 
applied for 2 h and then removed. 
Quantitative sensory testing (QST) was 
completed prior to drug application 
(baseline), 2 h after drug application, 
and 1 wk later. Perceived pain 
intensity was measured using a 
visual analog scale (VAS) following 
capsaicin or vehicle cream application. 
Significantly lower pain was reported 
in the week after application in the 
capsaicin-treated TMD subjects. For 
QST measures, there was a decreased 
thermal pain threshold 2 h after 
capsaicin application for both the 
control and TMD groups, but this 
resolved within a week. Capsaicin had 
no effect on pressure pain threshold 
or mechanical sensitivity in both TMD 
and healthy individuals. This study 
demonstrates that 8% topical capsaicin 
therapy is a relatively safe, simple, and 
effective treatment for patients with 
TMD.
Knowledge Transfer Statement: 
This study evaluated a novel topical 
capsaicin therapy for reducing 
orofacial pain. The results of this 
study can be used to provide another 
treatment option for patients with 
TMD.
Keywords: orofacial pain, TRPV1, 
clinical study, pain, neuroscience/
neurobiology, neuropharmacology
Introduction
Orofacial pain disorders are estimated 
to affect 20% of the US population 
(Lipton et al. 1993) and are made 
up largely of temporomandibular 
joint disorders (TMDs). TMD can 
encompass a complex musculoskeletal 
disorder presenting with pain, limited 
opening, and abnormal noises in the 
temporomandibular joint (TMJ). Reports 
from the Orofacial Pain Prospective 
Evaluation and Risk Assessment 
JCTXXX10.1177/2380084416675837JDR Clinical & Translational ResearchEffects of High-Dose Capsaicin on TMD Subjects
research-article2016
DOI: 10.1177/2380084416675837. 1Magnolia Orthodontics, Hickory, NC, USA; 2Department of Community Dentistry and Behavioral Science, College of Dentistry, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; 3Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry and Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea; 
4Department of Orthodontics, College of Dentistry, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; 5Department of Oral Surgery and Diagnostic Sciences, College of Dentistry, 
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. Corresponding author: J.K. Neubert, Department of Orthodontics, College of Dentistry, University of Florida, 1395 S. W. Archer 
Road, P.O. Box 100444, Gainesville, FL 32610-0444, USA. Email: jneubert@dental.ufl.edu
Effects of High-Dose Capsaicin 
on TMD Subjects: A 
Randomized Clinical Study
B.K. Campbell1, R.B. Fillingim2, S. Lee3, R. Brao4, D.D. Price5, and J.K. Neubert4
JDR Clinical & Translational Research 
Month 2016
2
(OPPERA) study, an ongoing, prospective 
study on the development of TMD, 
indicates an incidence rate for examiner-
verified first-onset TMD of 3.9% per 
annum, and a meta-analysis by Al-Jundi 
et al. (2008) reported a prevalence of 
at least 1 sign or symptom in 16% of 
the US population (Slade et al. 2013). 
Women are affected more frequently 
than men by an approximately 2 to 1 
margin (Solberg 1983; Lipton et al. 1993; 
LeResche 1997). Despite the significant 
impact of TMD in terms of suffering 
and financial burden, relatively few 
new treatments have emerged, and 
development of novel treatments to treat 
TMD pain remains a high priority.
A promising target for pain control is 
the transient receptor potential (TRP) 
channel, a family of receptors that 
mediates both temperature and pain 
(Jordt et al. 2003; Tominaga and Caterina 
2004; Patapoutian et al. 2009). The TRP 
vanilloid subfamily member 1 (TRPV1) is 
a ligand-gated ion channel involved with 
heat and inflammatory pain (Caterina 
and Julius 2001; Karai et al. 2004; Szallasi 
and Appendino 2004). TRPV1 responds 
to protons, temperatures greater than 
43°C, and capsaicin (Gunthorpe et al. 
2002; Szallasi and Appendino 2004; 
Tominaga and Caterina 2004) and is 
primarily expressed by Aδ and C-fiber 
primary afferent neurons. These neurons 
are responsible for the erythema, 
burning, and sensitivity to other stimuli 
after application of capsaicin. The 
expectation of TRPV1 may be a target 
for pain control (Caterina and Julius 
2001) and, if realized, a novel therapeutic 
approach inhibiting certain nociceptive 
neurons while maintaining other motor 
and sensory functions (Neubert et al. 
2003; Karai et al. 2004).
A number of studies evaluated the 
targeting of TRPV1 for pain control. 
Capsaicin activates TRPV1 but also 
desensitizes, inactivates, and even 
eliminates TRPV1-expressing neurons 
with prolonged exposure (Yaksh  
et al. 1979; Nolano et al. 1999; Malmberg 
et al. 2004). Clinical trials in diseased 
individuals indicate that capsaicin 
can produce analgesia when applied 
topically at relatively low doses (0.025% 
to 0.075%), and capsaicin has shown 
some efficacy for the treatment of chronic 
pain disorders such as rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA) 
(Deal et al. 1991; McCarthy and McCarty 
1992). In addition, studies have shown 
favorable results for patients with 
postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) (Peikert 
et al. 1991; Watson et al. 1993), and 
capsaicin is one of the only Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved 
drugs for treatment of PHN. Healthy 
subjects who applied capsaicin (0.075%) 
4 times daily for 3 wk had degeneration 
of epidermal nerve fibers (ENFs) by 
approximately 80% at the epidermis 
(Nolano et al. 1999). In contrast, a meta-
analysis evaluating the efficacy of low-
dose capsaicin indicated a moderate 
to poor efficacy when treating chronic 
neuropathic or musculoskeletal pain 
(Mason et al. 2004). In a randomized, 
double-blind, vehicle-controlled trial, 
there was no difference in reduction 
of symptoms between the 0.025% 
capsaicin and placebo groups with TMD 
(Winocur et al. 2000). Malmberg et al. 
(2004) compared the effectiveness of 
low-dose capsaicin (0.04%) to a high 
dose (8%) topically applied for up to 
120 min. They found that the low dose 
had no effect on reduction of ENFs or 
reduction of heat sensitivity compared 
to placebo, but a single dose of 8% 
capsaicin reduced the number of ENFs 
and produced desensitization to heat 
stimuli for 1 wk. Many recent studies 
have evaluated the 8% capsaicin patch 
for the treatment of neuropathic pain 
(Maihöfner and Heskamp 2013, 2014; Zis 
et al. 2014). A recent case series on the 
use of the 8% capsaicin patch reports a 
decrease in neuropathic pain for patients 
with various orofacial neuropathic pain 
(Gaul and Resch 2015). While many 
studies have been completed evaluating 
8% capsaicin as a pain therapy, using it 
as a therapy provides a conundrum, as 
it is a pain stimulus that then relieves 
pain. We were interested in the role of 
sensitization produced by capsaicin in 
both “healthy” and “diseased” (chronic 
pain) subjects.
Since orofacial pain is a hallmark of 
many different disorders and there are 
a multitude of different groups also 
within the TMD classification, we chose 
to recruit subjects who were classified 
within the “group IIIa, arthralgia of the 
TMJ criteria” to narrow the focus of the 
study. This group represents patients 
who commonly present to health 
care professionals for treatment, and 
we believe that this is the first study 
describing the use of 8% capsaicin in a 
TMD population. The goal of our study 
was 2-fold: 1) to evaluate the effects of a 
high-concentration (8%) capsaicin cream 
on normal pain sensitivity in healthy, 
control subjects and 2) to evaluate 
the effects of 8% capsaicin cream on 
patients with chronic orofacial pain. 
We completed a double-blind, vehicle-
controlled clinical trial to evaluate the 
analgesic efficacy of capsaicin in chronic 
TMD patients.
Methods
Subject Recruitment and 
Randomization
The study protocol complied with the 
guidelines of the Institutional Review 
Board at the University of Florida (UF). 
We enrolled TMD and healthy, control 
subjects (“non-TMD subjects”) from 
May 2006 to January 2009, who were 
identified through advertising within 
the greater Gainesville, Florida, region. 
Treatments were assigned via a random-
number generator, and syringes were 
labeled with a study protocol number. 
Both the subject and investigator 
were blinded to the treatment as the 
pharmacist did not break the study 
number code until the final analysis 
was completed. All subjects received 
participation compensation ($50 gift 
cards).
Inclusion Criteria
Healthy female volunteers (18 to 
65 y old) with American Society of 
Anesthesiologists (ASA) status 1 or 2 and 
deemed in good general health were 
recruited. This represents the age range 
of patients with TMD, and the exclusive 
Vol. XX • Issue X
Effects of High-Dose Capsaicin on TMD Subjects
3
sex was selected given the higher 
proportion of females (>2:1 female/
male) who develop TMD. The TMD 
patients’ inclusion criteria also included 
1) subjects to have TMJ pain of greater 
than 6 mo duration, 2) episodes of pain 
with an average rating of at least 3 out 
of 10 on a visual analog scale (VAS) for 
the week that immediately preceded 
the initial testing date or the day of 
testing, and 3) fulfilling the Research 
Diagnostic Criteria (RDC), group IIIa, 
arthralgia of the TMJ criteria (Dworkin 
and LeResche 1992). Subjects had to 
have a joint component with or without 
muscle pain but were excluded if they 
only had myalgia. By this RDC definition, 
these subjects had no crepitus, had 
verified joint pain with palpation at 
either the lateral pole or at the posterior 
attachment, and met one of the following 
conditions: 1) be able to point to either 
muscle or joint pain, 2) joint or muscle 
pain on assisted/unassisted opening, 
or 3) joint or muscle pain in right or 
left excursive movements. A single 
examiner completed all of the clinical 
examinations on both TMD and healthy 
subjects.
Exclusion Criteria
Exclusion criteria were as follows: 
ASA status of 3 to 5, pregnant or 
breastfeeding mothers, allergy to 
capsaicin or red chili peppers, and 
presence of chronic disease(s) other 
than TMD. Subjects with course crepitus 
(by subject report or examination) of 
the TMJ or any subjects who had taken 
any pain medications (e.g., ibuprofen, 
acetaminophen, opioids) within 48 h 
prior to participating in the trial for either 
testing day were also excluded.
General
Subjects were seen at the UF College 
of Dentistry, explained and signed 
the informed consent form, and then 
completed a health history and RDC for 
TMD History Questionnaires. Subjects 
were informed that they could stop 
participating in the study or have the 
cream removed at any point. If they 
asked for removal of the cream earlier 
than the designated time, then the 
time was noted and they were then 
given the option to continue with the 
rest of the study or stop all together. 
Blood pressure, temperature, results 
of pregnancy test, and VAS and verbal 
ratings of that day’s TMD pain were 
recorded initially prior to any testing. 
We tried to include as many participants 
as possible, but due to recruitment and 
funding issues, only 16 TMD subjects 
were enrolled, and these subjects 
were then split (n = 8/group) into the 
capsaicin and control groups.
Quantitative Sensory Testing
Quantitative sensory testing (QST) for 
mechanical and thermal sensitivity were 
completed prior to drug application 
(baseline), 2 h after drug application, and 
at the second visit 1 wk later for select 
groups. All QSTs were demonstrated on 
the nondominant arm to familiarize the 
subject to the testing procedures.
Pressure pain was evaluated using a 
clinical grade pressure algometer (FPX 
50—25 × 0.2N; Wagner). The subjects’ 
pressure pain threshold was determined 
by placing the probe tip perpendicular 
to the skin testing sites (lateral pole of 
the TMJ, mid-body of the superficial 
masseter) and applying pressure in an 
increasing manner at a rate of 1 kg/s. 
The subject signified the time of first 
painful response, at which point the 
pressure stimulus was terminated and 
the value recorded. After testing both 
sites bilaterally, VAS ratings of global 
pain were immediately recorded. Global 
pain was defined as clinical (TMD) pain 
(spontaneous, evoked) plus experimental 
pain. This test was repeated 3 times 
unless 2 of the 3 tests were not within 
0.5 kg, necessitating a fourth trial.
Changes in thermal sensitivity were 
assessed using the Medoc Thermal 
Testing Device (Medoc Advanced 
Medical Systems). Pain threshold was 
assessed using an ascending method of 
limits with a rate of rise equaling 0.5°C/s, 
starting at 32°C, with the maximum limit 
set at 53°C. The 3 × 3-cm² thermode was 
applied on the skin overlying the TMJ 
lateral pole and in the mid-region of the 
superficial masseter. Subjects indicated 
when they first felt pain by pressing a 
button immediately stopping the stimulus 
and the value recorded. The contralateral 
side of the face was then tested and 
a global pain rating using a VAS was 
taken 3 min later. This test was repeated 
3 times unless 2 of the 3 tests were not 
within 1°C, necessitating a fourth trial. 
The threshold for each patient was 
calculated as the mean of the individual 
trials.
Drug Application
Capsaicin powder (Formosa 
Laboratories) was compounded into an 
8% (w/v) topical emollient cream base 
(andydrous ointment, polysorbate 80, 
butylated hydroxytoleune NF, water) by 
Westlab Pharmacy. Capsaicin content 
was verified by high-performance liquid 
chromatography analysis (Analytical 
Research Laboratories). The vehicle 
cream was the same topical solution but 
contained no capsaicin. The investigator 
spread a 0.1-mL dollop of cream to a 
standardized area overlying the affected 
TMJ and superficial masseter and then 
covered the site with a cotton gauge for 
2 h. This area extended 3 cm anteriorly 
and inferiorly from the posterior aspect 
of the TMJ. A square 3 × 3-cm template 
was cut into a rubber dental dam to 
standardize the application site. The 
drug was applied to the right or left side 
randomly for subjects without TMD, 
whereas for the TMD sufferers, the side 
that was reported as more painful was 
studied.
Capsaicin-evoked pain intensity VAS 
ratings were collected every 5 min for 
the first half hour of the experiment and 
then every 30 min for the 2-h duration, at 
which point the subjects’ face was wiped 
clean with soaked gauze of half and 
half cream followed by alcohol swabs to 
remove residual capsaicin. QST was then 
repeated, and then the patients were 
discharged. All subjects were phoned 24 h 
following the study drug application to 
record their pain levels and any adverse 
events. TMD patients rated their clinical 
pain upon awakening for 7 days using 
JDR Clinical & Translational Research 
Month 2016
4
a VAS home diary. These subjects were 
retested 1 wk from their initial visit, and 
this consisted of performing the same 
QST followed by the RDC for TMD 
Physical Assessment (Axis I). A subset of 
non-TMD subjects (n = 10) were tested 
again at this 1-wk time point to evaluate 
the effects of capsaicin on QST. This 
separate control group was completed 
in a single-blinded fashion, as the 
investigator was not blinded.
Measures
Perceived pain intensity was measured 
using a slide algometer VAS (Price  
et al. 1983) following capsaicin or 
vehicle cream application. In using the 
pain sensation intensity scale, the patient 
would slide the middle sliding part of 
the device to the right for an indicator 
of greater pain sensation intensity. The 
arrow at the extreme left meant no pain 
sensation at all, and the arrow at the 
extreme right indicated a pain sensation 
intensity that subject imagined to be the 
most intense that she could possibly 
experience.
Statistical Analyses
Individual subjects who were assigned 
to control and treatment groups provided 
repeated observations for subjective pain 
measurements during 5, 10, . . . 180 min 
and, later, 1 to 7 days. Because the serial 
measurements and distinction between 
relatively short-term versus long-term 
effects were correlated according to 
the individual subjects, multilevel linear 
mixed modeling was applied. Bonferroni 
adjustment was used to compare 
multiple mean differences. All values were 
considered significant when P < 0.05.
Results
A total of 44 control (non-TMD) 
subjects were recruited with 21 receiving 
capsaicin and the remaining 23 receiving 
vehicle. An additional 10 non-TMD 
subjects were recruited to evaluate the 
effects of capsaicin on QST performed 
1 wk later, as described in the Methods. 
Sixteen TMD subjects were recruited, 
and upon evaluation, they met the 
criteria for RDC, group IIIa. Eight 
received capsaicin and 8 vehicle cream. 
None of the participants dropped out, 
but 2 (1 from each of the TMD and non-
TMD capsaicin groups) requested the 
cream to be removed before the 2-h time 
limit after drug application due to excess 
pain, and their data were not included in 
the results. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the 
total number of subjects enrolled to date 
tabulated by age and by race, excluding 
the 2 participants who did not complete 
all requirements.
Effects of Capsaicin on 
Experimental and Global Pain
Application of capsaicin increased pain 
ratings compared to vehicle treatment 
in both TMD symptomatic (Fig. 1A) and 
non-TMD subjects (Fig. 1B). When the 
short-term effects of capsaicin versus 
vehicle treatments were evaluated up 
to 2 h postapplication for the TMD and 
non-TMD groups, there was a significant 
increase in VAS ratings over time for 
the capsaicin-treated groups compared 
to vehicle-treated subjects (analysis of 
variance [ANOVA], P < 0.001). The peak 
value (mean ± SEM) of this increase was 
similar for both groups, 5.3 ± 0.6 and 
4.8 ± 0.6 for the TMD and non-TMD 
groups, respectively. There was a similar 
response pattern for both groups, with 
the peak rating occurring 15 min after 
capsaicin and then returning to baseline 
after 2 h.
Since the TMD group had existing 
pain, we used a global pain rating that 
was a combination of their existing 
clinical pain plus the experimentally 
induced pain. The TMD group global 
baseline pain rating (prior to initial 
QST) was compared to post–study drug 
(capsaicin or vehicle) pain ratings. The 
VAS measures during 1 to 7 days (Fig. 2) 
were significantly greater in the control 
vehicle group than in the capsaicin 
treatment group (P = 0.001). The VAS 
ratings were significantly lower for the 
capsaicin-treated subjects over the 1-wk 
postapplication period (P = 0.033).
Thermal Pain Threshold
Capsaicin and vehicle TMD groups had 
similar baseline thermal pain thresholds 
on their affected side, and there was 
no difference with the no/less pain 
contralateral side threshold, and this 
comparison holds true for the non-TMD 
groups. Both TMD and non-TMD groups 
(Fig. 3) demonstrated a significant 
Table 1.
Subject Demographics: Age Distribution.
Treatment
Normal
TMD
n
Mean
SD
n
Mean
SD
Age distribution
 
  Control vehicle
23
22.5
6.9
8
25.8
12.2
  Capsaicin 8%
30
28.0
10.6
7
29.3
12.3
  Total
53
25.6
9.5
15
27.4
11.9
Two-way (2-factorial) analysis of variance revealed that there is no significant difference in the age distribution between normal and TMD subjects (P = 0.437) or 
between control and treatment groups (P = 0.127).
TMD, temporomandibular joint disorder.
Vol. XX • Issue X
Effects of High-Dose Capsaicin on TMD Subjects
5
decrease in thermal pain threshold at  
2 h after capsaicin cream application. 
The thermal thresholds for the capsaicin-
treated groups returned to baseline levels 
at the 1-week follow-up for the control 
subjects (baseline: 44.5°C ± 0.8°C; 1 
wk: 45.3°C ± 0.8°C; P = 0.27) and TMD 
groups (baseline: 40.4°C ± 1.5°C; 1 wk: 
41.6°C ± 1.7°C; P = 0.51). No significant 
thermal pain threshold differences were 
observed at any time of the postvehicle 
test sessions (+2 h, 1 wk) compared 
to baseline levels between the normal 
controls and TMD groups.
Pressure Pain Threshold
TMD subjects (n = 14) had similar 
baseline thresholds (2.0 ± 0.4 g) 
compared to non-TMD (n = 53) controls 
(2.2 ± 0.6 g) on the treated/symptomatic 
side. No significant changes in pressure 
pain threshold across time emerged 
for normal controls or TMD subjects 
regardless of treatment, site (TMJ or 
superficial masseter), or side of face 
compared to baseline. There was no 
statistical significance between TMD and 
normal subjects, regardless of treatment 
at baseline and after 2 h, or between 
baseline and 2 h for Von Frey QST. 
Analysis was done using Fisher’s exact 
test and the Cochran-Mantel-Haenzel 
statistic.
Discussion
The concept of targeting TRPV1 due 
to its role in inflammation and pain has 
provided a rationale for the treatment 
of chronic pain disorders. Findings 
from previous studies are mixed, with 
some studies indicating efficacy in the 
treatment of OA, RA, and PHN. Other 
reports indicate that capsaicin’s analgesic 
effectiveness at lower concentration 
may be insufficient as a viable therapy. 
With only 1 study evaluating capsaicin’s 
resolution of TMD pain, there is a 
definite need to explore the effects of 
higher dose topical capsaicin before 
conclusions can be drawn about 
targeting TRPV1 as an effective method 
for controlling TMD pain and ultimately 
chronic pain.
The purpose of this study was to 
evaluate a high-concentration (8%) 
topical capsaicin cream on TMD pain. 
Table 2.
Subject Demographics: Ethnic Distribution.
Ethnicity
Normal Subjects, n (%)
TMD Patients, n (%)
Control
Capsaicin
Total
Control
Capsaicin
Total
Caucasian
12 (52.2)
20 (66.6)
32 (60.5)
5 (62.5)
5 (71.4)
10 (66.6)
African American
2 (8.7)
2 (6.7)
4 (7.5)
1 (14.3)
1 (6.7)
Hispanic
8 (34.8)
5 (16.7)
13 (24.5)
3 (37.5)
1 (14.3)
4 (26.7)
Asian
1 (4.3)
3 (10.0)
4 (7.5)
 
Fisher’s exact statistic showed that there is no significant difference in the ethnicity distribution neither between normal and TMD subjects (P = 0.459) or between 
control and treatment groups (P = 0.569).
TMD, temporomandibular joint disorder.
Figure 1. Global pain (experimental + clinical pain) ratings. (A) Temporomandibular joint 
disorder (TMD) and (B) non-TMD group global pain ratings for up to 2 h after capsaicin or 
vehicle cream application. Application of capsaicin increased reported pain compared to 
vehicle in both healthy and TMD symptomatic subjects, with a significant increase in visual 
analog scale (VAS) ratings over time for the capsaicin-treated group compared to vehicle-
treated subjects (analysis of variance, P < 0.001).
JDR Clinical & Translational Research 
Month 2016
6
Our data suggest that capsaicin may 
have some clinical benefits of relieving 
TMD pain. Significantly lower pain was 
reported in the week postapplication in 
the capsaicin-treated subjects compared 
to the vehicle subjects. This contrasts 
the previous capsaicin TMD study that 
found no difference between the TMD 
and healthy control groups (Winocur 
et al. 2000). This discrepancy could be 
attributed to a lower dose of capsaicin 
and in the weekly reporting interval, 
whereas our study collected measures 
daily. Our data showed a significant 
difference between the TMD capsaicin 
and vehicle groups over the entire 7 d 
postapplication.
Our approach used established QST 
techniques to evaluate sensory changes 
and pain. There was a decreased thermal 
pain threshold 2 h after capsaicin 
application, but this resolved 1 wk 
postapplication with return of normal 
thermal pain threshold responses. 
Thermal pain thresholds showed that 
regardless of disease state of the group 
(TMD vs. non-TMD), the threshold 
decreased only on the side ipsilateral to 
the capsaicin and was only seen at the 
2-h time point rather than 7 d out. This 
finding seemingly contradicts previous 
findings of desensitization 1 wk later 
after a 2-h application of 8% capsaicin or 
3 wk later after multiple daily low-dose 
capsaicin applications at the same skin 
site (Nolano et al. 1999; Malmberg et al. 
2004). Their findings suggest thermal 
sensitization determines when a subject 
first feels warmth (sensitization) rather 
than pain due to heat (thermal pain 
threshold), which we evaluated.
Capsaicin had no effect on pressure 
pain threshold for TMD and healthy 
individuals. This contrasts reports of 
pressure pain threshold differences in 
TMD and controls. Our study focused on 
arthralgia rather than myalgia; therefore, 
this selection bias may account for the 
lack of pressure sensitivity between 
the treatment groups. We also found 
no difference in punctate mechanical 
sensitivity between baseline and the 2-h 
time points between normal control and 
TMD groups. These findings indicate 
that effects of this high-concentration 
topical capsaicin cream do not affect the 
mechanoreceptors and either pressure 
or punctate pain. This contrasts findings 
regarding mechanical allodynia induced 
by topically applied 0.075% capsaicin 
(Petersen et al. 2000). However, a 
different mechanical stimulus (light 
paintbrush touch) differs substantially 
from the pressure and Von Frey stimuli 
used in the current protocol.
Not surprisingly, capsaicin produced 
pain in both the TMD and healthy 
subject groups during the postapplication 
testing period. An hour after capsaicin 
application, the TMD group pain 
returned to or was below initial pain 
levels. The TMD group receiving vehicle 
had no increase in pain; rather, they 
showed stable pain levels that declined. 
As noted, 2 of 38 individuals felt like the 
pain was too much and did not want 
to continue suggesting that some of the 
population may have poor compliance 
with the present treatment modality.
There exists a somewhat paradoxical 
finding that a topical therapy can 
affect an essentially deep tissue (TMJ/
masseter muscle) pain input. While 
it is possible for the capsaicin to 
penetrate and directly activate TRPV1 
receptors within the joint or muscle, 
other actions may occur due to central 
modulation. The central nervous system 
is susceptible to peripheral, nociceptive 
stimuli and responds with sensitization 
of the peripheral receptive fields. Our 
data suggest that this occurs following 
Figure 2. One-week temporomandibular joint disorder (TMD) group global (TMD) pain 
ratings posttreatment. The visual analog scale (VAS) measures during 1 to 7 days were 
significantly greater in the control vehicle group than in the capsaicin treatment group  
(*P = 0.001).
Figure 3. Thermal pain threshold responses for temporomandibular joint disorder (TMD) 
and non-TMD subjects. There was a significant (*P < 0.001) decrease in the threshold for 
both TMD and non-TMD groups that received capsaicin treatment compared to vehicle 
and baseline predrug values. There were no significant (NS) differences for any of the 
treatment or study groups when the contralateral (nontreated) side was evaluated.
Vol. XX • Issue X
Effects of High-Dose Capsaicin on TMD Subjects
7
capsaicin application, as those subjects 
(both TMD and healthy controls) 
experienced thermal allodynia at the 
2-h postapplication time point. This 
manifested as a significant lowering of 
the heat pain threshold. Conversely, 
central inhibitory mechanisms can be 
triggered such that the painful stimuli 
can actually lower pain responses via 
compensatory inhibitory pathways. 
Our data for the TMD subjects support 
this phenomenon, as these subjects 
demonstrated a week-long decrease in 
global pain rating following a severe 
noxious insult. This is consistent with 
the theory of diffuse noxious inhibitory 
control (DNIC) systems, which implies 
that a noxious stimulus can activate 
global inhibitory systems to reduce 
pain (Le Bars 2002). This pathway 
is likely mediated by endogenous 
opioid pathways, such as found in the 
periacqueductal gray (Basbaum and 
Jessell 2000). The findings from our 
current study suggest that initial algesic 
response following 8% topical capsaicin 
cream application may activate inhibitory 
systems to produce long-duration effects. 
This may complement the desensitization 
concept proposed by previous topical 
capsaicin studies and together support 
the use of capsaicin as a beneficial 
therapy for patients.
Overall, we found that there was a 
significant effect for reducing TMD pain 
over the 1-wk period following a single 
application of capsaicin; however, the 
main limitation of this study still remains 
the relatively low sample size for the 
TMD groups. While promising, further 
studies with larger cohorts that include 
other RDC diagnostic groups are needed. 
We acknowledge that male patients also 
have facial pain and TMD in particular, 
albeit at a much lower occurrence. 
Due to practical experimental issues, 
including funding and difficulty in 
recruiting subjects, we chose to focus 
on female subjects, and this limits the 
generalizability of our results. Future 
studies will include male subjects, 
evaluation of duration of analgesic effect, 
optimal application (e.g., frequency, 
duration), and tolerability, which are 
important factors that require further 
evaluation for 8% topical capsaicin 
therapy.
Author Contributions
B.K. Campbell, contributed to 
design, data acquisition, and analysis, 
drafted the manuscript; R.B. Fillingim, 
contributed to conception and data 
interpretation, critically revised the 
manuscript; S. Lee, contributed to 
data analysis, critically revised the 
manuscript; R. Brao, contributed to 
design and data acquisition, critically 
revised the manuscript; D.D. Price, 
contributed to conception, design, and 
data interpretation, critically revised the 
manuscript; J.K. Neubert, contributed 
to conception, design, data acquisition, 
analysis, and interpretation, drafted and 
critically revised the manuscript. All 
authors gave final approval and agree 
to be accountable for all aspects of the 
work.
Acknowledgments
Support for this research was provided 
by grant 1K22DE014865-01A1, National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial 
Research, National Institutes of Health, 
Department of Health and Human 
Services, Bethesda, MD, USA. The authors 
thank Prince Hinson for compounding 
and preparing the study drugs. The 
authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the authorship 
and/or publication of this article. In 
memoriam: Donald D. Price, PhD.
References
Al-Jundi MA, John MT, Setz JM, Szentpétery A, 
Kuss O. 2008. Meta-analysis of treatment 
need for temporomandibular disorders 
in adult nonpatients. J Orofac Pain. 
22(2):97–107.
Basbaum A, Jessell T. 2000. The perception of 
pain. New York (NY): Elsevier Science.
Caterina MJ, Julius D. 2001. The vanilloid 
receptor: a molecular gateway to the pain 
pathway. Annu Rev Neurosci. 24:487–517.
Deal CL, Schnitzer TJ, Lipstein E, Seibold JR, 
Stevens RM, Levy MD, Albert D, Renold 
F. 1991. Treatment of arthritis with topical 
capsaicin: a double-blind trial. Clin Ther. 
13(3):383–395.
Dworkin SF, LeResche L. 1992. Research 
diagnostic criteria for temporomandibular 
disorders: review, criteria, examinations 
and specifications, critique. J Craniomandib 
Disord. 6(4):301–355.
Gaul C, Resch S. 2015. Application of 
the capsaicin 8% cutaneous patch in 
neuropathic pain of the head and face: a 
case series. Cephalalgia. 35(6):545–550.
Gunthorpe MJ, Benham CD, Randall A, Davis JB. 
2002. The diversity in the vanilloid (TRPV) 
receptor family of ion channels. Trends 
Pharmacol Sci. 23(4):183–191.
Jordt SE, McKemy DD, Julius D. 2003. Lessons 
from peppers and peppermint: the 
molecular logic of thermosensation. Curr 
Opin Neurobiol. 13(4):487–492.
Karai L, Brown DC, Mannes AJ, Connelly ST, 
Brown J, Gandal M, Wellisch OM, Neubert 
JK, Olah Z, Iadarola MJ. 2004. Deletion of 
vanilloid receptor 1–expressing primary 
afferent neurons for pain control. J Clin 
Invest. 113(9):1344–1352.
Le Bars D. 2002. The whole body receptive field 
of dorsal horn multireceptive neurones. 
Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 40(1–3):29–44.
LeResche L. 1997. Epidemiology of 
temporomandibular disorders: implications 
for the investigation of etiologic factors. Crit 
Rev Oral Biol Med. 8(3):291–305.
Lipton JA, Ship JA, Larach-Robinson D. 1993. 
Estimated prevalence and distribution of 
reported orofacial pain in the United States. 
J Am Dent Assoc. 124(10):115–121.
Maihöfner CG, Heskamp ML. 2013. Prospective, 
non-interventional study on the tolerability 
and analgesic effectiveness over 12 weeks 
after a single application of capsaicin 8% 
cutaneous patch in 1044 patients with 
peripheral neuropathic pain: first results 
of the QUEPP study. Curr Med Res Opin. 
29(6):673–683.
Maihöfner CG, Heskamp ML. 2014. Treatment 
of peripheral neuropathic pain by topical 
capsaicin: impact of pre-existing pain in the 
QUEPP-study. Eur J Pain. 18(5):671–679.
Malmberg AB, Mizisin AP, Calcutt NA, von 
Stein T, Robbins WR, Bley KR. 2004. 
Reduced heat sensitivity and epidermal 
nerve fiber immunostaining following 
single applications of a high-concentration 
capsaicin patch. Pain. 111(3):360–367.
Mason L, Moore RA, Derry S, Edwards JE, 
McQuay HJ. 2004. Systematic review of 
topical capsaicin for the treatment of chronic 
pain. BMJ. 328(7446):991.
McCarthy GM, McCarty DJ. 1992. Effect of 
topical capsaicin in the therapy of painful 
JDR Clinical & Translational Research 
Month 2016
8
osteoarthritis of the hands. J Rheumatol. 
19(4):604–607.
Neubert JK, Karai L, Jun JH, Kim HS, Olah 
Z, Iadarola MJ. 2003. Peripherally 
induced resiniferatoxin analgesia. Pain. 
104(1–2):219–228.
Nolano M, Simone DA, Wendelschafer-Crabb 
G, Johnson T, Hazen E, Kennedy WR. 1999. 
Topical capsaicin in humans: parallel loss of 
epidermal nerve fibers and pain sensation. 
Pain. 81(1–2):135–145.
Patapoutian A, Tate S, Woolf CJ. 2009. Transient 
receptor potential channels: targeting pain at 
the source. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 8(1):55–68.
Peikert A, Hentrich M, Ochs G. 1991. Topical 
0.025% capsaicin in chronic post-
herpetic neuralgia: efficacy, predictors of 
response and long-term course. J Neurol. 
238(8):452–456.
Petersen KL, Fields HL, Brennum J, Sandroni P, 
Rowbotham MC. 2000. Capsaicin evoked 
pain and allodynia in post-herpetic 
neuralgia. Pain. 88(2):125–133.
Price DD, McGrath PA, Rafii A, Buckingham 
B. 1983. The validation of visual analogue 
scales as ratio scale measures for chronic 
and experimental pain. Pain. 17(1):45–56.
Slade GD, Bair E, Greenspan JD, Dubner 
R, Fillingim RB, Diatchenko L, Maixner 
W, Knott C, Ohrbach R. 2013. Signs 
and symptoms of first-onset TMD and 
sociodemographic predictors of its 
development: the OPPERA prospective 
cohort study. J Pain. 14(12 Suppl):T20–32.
e1–3.
Solberg W. 1983. Epidemiology, incidence 
and prevalence of temporomandibular 
disorders.In: Laskin D, Greenfield W, Gale 
W, editors. The president’s conference of the 
examination, diagnosis, and management of 
temporomandibular disorders. Chicago (IL): 
American Dental Association; 1983.
Szallasi A, Appendino G. 2004. Vanilloid 
receptor TRPV1 antagonists as the next 
generation of painkillers: are we putting 
the cart before the horse? J Med Chem. 
47(11):2717–2723.
Tominaga M, Caterina MJ. 2004. 
Thermosensation and pain. J Neurobiol. 
61(1):3–12.
Watson CP, Tyler KL, Bickers DR, Millikan LE, 
Smith S, Coleman E. 1993. A randomized 
vehicle-controlled trial of topical capsaicin in 
the treatment of postherpetic neuralgia. Clin 
Ther. 15(3):510–526.
Winocur E, Gavish A, Halachmi M, Eli I, Gazit 
E. 2000. Topical application of capsaicin 
for the treatment of localized pain in the 
temporomandibular joint area. J Orofac Pain. 
14(1):31–36.
Yaksh TL, Farb DH, Leeman SE, Jessell TM. 
1979. Intrathecal capsaicin depletes 
substance p in the rat spinal cord and 
produces prolonged thermal analgesia. 
Science. 206(4417):481–483.
Zis P, Apsokardos A, Isaia C, Sykioti P, 
Vadalouca A. 2014. Posttraumatic and 
postsurgical neuropathic pain responsive to 
treatment with capsaicin 8% topical patch. 
Pain Physician. 17(2):E213–E218.
